In this thesis, we have conducted research on off line automatic recognition of
Arabic handwritten text. Automatic recognition of Arabic handwritten text has many
applications, like forms processing, postal address and zip code recognition, etc.
Recognition performance of Arabic handwritten text lags far behind compared to Latin
and Chinese scripts. Cursive nature of Arabic script, overlapping characters and ligatures,
presence and variability of dots/diacritics, lack of benchmarking databases are among the
reasons that make Arabic handwriting recognition a challenging task.
Research on Arabic handwriting recognition has mainly focused on the
recognition of isolated characters, numerals and words. Few works have been reported on
the recognition of Arabic handwritten text. Moreover, statistical methods (like Hidden
Markov Models (HMM), Neural Networks, etc.) have been more common in the reported
results on Arabic handwriting recognition. Structural methods have remained largely
unexplored in this regard. In addition, some recent multi classifier based systems have
tried to integrate both statistical and structural techniques. We present several novel techniques for different phases of Arabic handwriting
recognition using a structural approach. We present three segmentation algorithms:
segmentation of a page into lines, a line into words/sub words and a word into
characters/graphemes. In addition, we introduce polygonal approximation based
representation and modeling of Arabic text. The recognition system is based on a
proposed dissimilarity measure. Polygon based modeling of text, prototype selection
using set medians, lexicon reduction using dot descriptors etc. are some of the
techniques that are applied to Arabic handwriting recognition for the first time. These
techniques are applied to Arabic handwritten isolated characters, digits, words and text
recognition. Hence, this thesis addresses the lack of research in structural methods for
Arabic handwriting recognition. In addition, the presented techniques may provide
alternate sources of information to be utilized in multi classifiers systems.
The proposed techniques are applied to different databases. We have obtained
competitive results compared to the state of the art performance in statistical approaches
and have surpassed the results based on structural techniques. In addition, the proposed
techniques can be further extended. Moreover, we believe that several avenues of
research in Arabic handwriting recognition have been initiated in this thesis.