Aluminum extrusion finds extensive application in the construction, automobile and
aerospace industries. High pressures, elevated temperatures, complex and intricate section
geometries lead to repeated mechanical and thermal stresses in the die and affiliated
tooling. Product rework and rejects can be traced back to various defects spread over the
die life cycle: die design, die manufacture and heat treatment, process parameters, inprocess
die maintenance/correction and, billet type and quality. Therefore, improved and
efficient service life of die and related tooling used in the extrusion press is one the most
important factors in maximizing productivity and minimizing cost for ensuring the
economical efficiency of an aluminum extrusion plant. How often a die has to be scrapped
and replaced with a new one directly contributes to the commercial viability of producing
a certain profile.
The focus of the current work is on three distinct yet inter related studies pertaining to
the improvement of aluminum extrusion die. Study A (Die Failure Analysis) is an
investigation of various modes and critical failure types based on industrial data (Chapter 
2), examination of failed dies and finite element simulation for identification of critical
process parameters and design features in die fatigue life (Chapter 3). In Study B (Die
Surface Hardening Treatment), two stage controlled gas nitriding process for H13 steel is
evaluated, both experimentally and numerically, in terms of nitrided case morphology
and properties (Chapter 4) followed by experimental and numerical investigation of the
effects of repeated nitriding (Chapter 5), pre nitriding surface preparation (Chapter 6)
and die profile geometry (Chapter 7) on nitriding performance in regard to die service
life. In Study C (Effect of Billet Quality on Die Life), the effect of billet quality and
related influencing extrusion parameters on the die service life is investigated based on
industrial data and some regression based die life models are proposed (Chapter 8). This
is followed by a detailed microstructural investigation of different billet samples and finite
element analysis of extrusion process to observe the influence of smelter (primary) and
recycled (secondary) billets on the useful life of extrusion die (Chapter 9).