Static adsorption experiments were conducted to investigate the
adsorption and precipitation properties of various surfactants including
petroleum sulfonate (T R S 10 410), ethoxylated sulfonates (V2880, V3348,
B1083, B1139) and nonionics (T150) onto Saudi Arabian limestone. The
effect of parameters such as solid to liquid ratio, salinity, pH,
tem perature, surfactant ty p e , ethoxylation number, sacrificial agents,
oil and alcohol has been investigated.
The adsorption data fo r limestone/TRS10 410 system and
V2880/system at d ifferen t salinities show th at the increase in ionic
strength generally increases the surfactant adsorption on limestone at
higher sulfonate concentrations. The dependence of adsorption on pH
shows marginal sulfonate adsorption above ZPC (p H =8.3) where
limestone is negatively charged and extremely high adsorption below pH
of 8 .3 , where the surface of limestone acquires positive charge.
Temperature data at three d ifferen t levels (25 , 50 and 90 °C ) show
that adsorption drastically increases with increasing tem perature.
Increasing the ethoxylation number of surfactants decreases the
adsorption but concurrently increases the CMC of surfactants. The
results also indicate th at adsorption of surfactants on limestone can be
reduced with addition of silicates as sacrificial agents and n butanol as
co surfactant. Adsorption data in the presence of crude oil show that
adsorption of ethoxylated sulfonates increases significantly in the oil. The adsorption tests fo r nonionics (T150) show about fiv e  fo ld
higher adsorption than the anionic surfactant (B1083) of th e same
ethoxylation number under the same experimental conditions.
Precipitation behaviour of TRS10 410 in the presence of NaCI and
CaCI2 indicates th a t the surfactant is not tolerant to even as low as 1 
NaCI and 0.15  C aCI2 levels at room tem perature. On the other hand,
the precipitation behaviour of ethoxylated sulfonates at 20  NaCI and
90°C tem perature indicates th a t this class of surfactants is indeed more
tolerant to both mono and m ulti valent ions.
The results were analyzed to formulate the most favorable conditions
to achieve minimum adsorption fo r Saudi Arabian limestone reservoirs.
Mechanisms governing the surfactant adsorption on limestone are
elucidated and a surfactant formulation is designed fo r high salinity and
high tem perature limestone reservoirs to achieve minimum adsorption fo r
Saudi Arabian limestone.