Infrared thermography is an important and powerful technique for diagnostics and
evaluation of building envelope, in terms of locating thermal bridges, damaged thermal
insulation, air leakage, moisture damage, and cracks, all of which contribute to an
increase in the energy consumption of the buildings. This is because typically the thermal
gains or losses in practice are greater than those estimated during the design stage.
Accurate and detailed information of where a problem occurs can reveal the source of the
problem thus avoiding extensive renovation work and hence decreasing the cost of repair
work and potential energy savings can be achieved. The present study is aimed at
assessing the effective R value of building envelope, using high definition thermal
imaging technique.
It focuses on the investigation of the thermal performance of building envelope of
residential building under hot humid climate represented by Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. A
residential building on KFUPM campus is selected to conduct both thermographic and
heat flux measurements. The building envelope is modified by installing three different
types of insulation with intentionally introduced envelope defects (Test Wall). Data
obtained by heat flux measurements about the building envelope thermal characteristics
have being processed following methods of the ISO standard 9869:1994. To solve the
required algorithm a MATLAB Program was developed. Simultaneously thermal imaging
technique is used to record the surface temperature of the test wall. Recorded thermal
images (IRT) are analyzed to detect missing and damaged thermal insulation, and thermal
bridging. A method for quantification of the impact of thermal insulation defects is
developed to improve the prediction of the actual thermal resistance of building envelope
using infrared thermography. As a result of analysis of R value calculation for the test
wall it is found that R values determined using IRT on average are varying from the Rvalue
measured using dynamic method by 7.3  when R value is determined based on
reference R value measured using dynamic method. The IRT method described in the
study can be used to obtain the effective R value of the envelope considering the total
defective area rather than measuring the R values at single point using the dynamic
method. Energy simulation program Visual DOE is then used to evaluate the impact of
thermal bridging on cooling energy, compared to when the building envelope is properly
designed and well constructed