This thesis presents current local and international practices o f building maintenance
management auditing, identifies factors affecting auditing, and identifies and ranks
factors affecting auditing o f maintenance departments in large organizations in Saudi
Arabia. The objective o f this thesis is to assess factors affecting maintenance
management auditing and then develop a suitable auditing form for building
maintenance. To achieve these objectives, previous studies and previously developed
audit forms were reviewed, and a survey was designed to assess the opinions cf
specialists in the maintenance field towards various factors and their importance.
The developed questionnaire was distributed to large organizations in the Eastern
province o f Saudi Arabia. A total 100 questionnaires were distributed to governmental
and private organizations, 50 for each. A total of 25 completed responses were received
from governmental organizations and 22 were received from the private sector. The
survey was statistically analyzed. The survey showed that 84  o f the factors and
sub factors are ranked as “Important” while others are “Extremely Important” and
“Moderately Important” by the total samples. In addition, these factors are categorized
into six main components, namely: organization & human resources, work load
identification & performance measures, work planning & scheduling, work
accomplishment, information technology & appraisal, and material management. Each
component is composed of many factors and sub factors. These factors were ranked
according to their importance indices. The result indicated that governmental and private
organizations agree on ranking factors affecting building maintenance management
auditing in Saudi Arabia.
Based on the literature review, the outcome from the questionnaires and the calculated
importance index for each factor, a suitable auditing form for building maintenance
management in Saudi Arabia was developed. The survey showed a lack of awareness on
the subject o f maintenance management and a need for auditing techniques, since theE is
no standard audit form or procedure to be followed by each organization’s auditors.
Finally, conclusions and recommendations were presented.