This thesis presents the investigation procedure and results o f the assessment of
the impact o f HVAC system's design and operation on IAQ in commercial and office
buildings in the Eastern Province o f Saudi Arabia. The research methodology has been
designed based on the literature review and includes HVAC designer's survey, building
assessment survey, data analysis, and finally, formulating conclusions and
recommendations. The HVAC designer's survey consisted o f personal interviews and
questionnaire survey to the professionals in the field. The questions included dealt with
the designer's background information. HVAC systems design and selection, indoor
conditions and ventilation design, and HVAC systems components design. A total o f 32
HVAC designers participated in the study thereby providing information regarding the
IAQ concerns that are taken into consideration. Manufacturers and suppliers of HVAC
systems were also contacted to obtain product literature. The most common types of
HVAC systems being employed in commercial buildings in this region have been found
to be rooftop package units, split systems, and central constant volume systems.
Building survey consisted o f identifying the prospective buildings, walk through
inspections, environmental measurements, and questionnaire survey to building
occupants. A total o f 24 commercial and office buildings were finally selected for this
study based on the type o f HVAC system employed, the size o f the building, and the ease
of accessibility. In all, 504 filled in questionnaires were received from the occupants of
these buildings. A "Building Assessment" form was developed for the building audit
and/or walk through inspection  Parameters that are indicative o f human comfort in
spaces such as temperature, relative humidity and carbon dioxide concentration were
measured. The outcome o f this survey has indicated that most o f the buildings do not have
a serious problem with LAQ, where as cigarette smoking has been suggested as the main
issue o f concern to building occupants. Based upon the literature review, the outcome
from the analyses o f the two questionnaires, and the environmental measurements, general
guidelines have been formulated for HVAC systems design, and Operation &
M aintenance for unproved IAQ in hot and humid climates o f Saudi Arabia. An easy to
use checklist was developed for the evaluation of HVAC systems design and Operation &
Maintenance to insure proper IAQ requirements.