This thesis presents the assessment of current safety measures in the design and use
o f residential buildings in Saudi Arabia and identifies common safety deficiencies. To
achieve these objectives two types o f survey were undertaken. The first type of survey
was designed to assess how building designers express their experiences in dealing with
safety measures in the design of typical types o f residential buildings. Namely, villas,
low rise and high rise apartment buildings. The second type o f survey was designed to
investigate safety practices in existing residential buildings in addition to assessing the
degree o f safety awareness among residents in their homes.
A total of 102 and 433 completed forms were collected out of 112 and 480
distributed forms from the first and the second types of the questionnaire, respectively.
Both o f these surveys were statistically analyzed. The surveys showed that
considerations o f safety issues by the designers as well as safety authorities are
ineffective especially for low rise type of residential buildings. In addition, results
indicated that many safety issues are not seriously considered in the design o f villas and
low rise apartment buildings while better considerations are given to high rise apartment
buildings.
Based on the literature review, the outcome from the analyses of two questionnaires
and safety deficiencies, a systematic safety compliance in the form of a checklist was
developed with respect to existing local safety instructions and international safety codes
and standards. This checklist can be used by the design offices and safety authorities in
the design and approval o f new residential buildings. In addition, safety audit checklist
for assessing the effectiveness of safety measures in existing residential buildings was
formulated.
Residents survey results showed that most o f them do not take care of many safety
aspects in their homes especially fire and smoke control related issues. In fact, most of
the buildings surveyed do not have the required fire protection systems. Moreover, most
o f the residents do not pay sufficient attention to electrical safety requirements. Finally,
conclusions and recommendations were presented.