The quantification of spilled hydrocarbon is of vital importance and is a first step
in the remediation hierarchy. In most cases, watertable elevation and hydrocarbon
thickness are the primary field data available to enable the evaluation of the extent of
hydrocarbon contamination. However, because of the unavailability o f relationship
between the spilled hydrocarbon and its thickness in the monitoring wells under dynamic
water table conditions, there is a marked paucity of research considering fluctuating
water table conditions. A mathematical model was developed to predict the extent of
hydrocarbon contamination. Developed model incorporates the water table fluctuation
history, hysteresis, and entrapment. An experimental setup was utilized to obtain data on
hydrocarbon thickness with the fluctuated water table conditions. The data obtained lfom
the study were used to validate the mathematical model. In the experimental program
four runs were performed: Uniform sand and well graded sand were used with diesel and
kerosene. Simulation results using the developed model were compared with
experimental as well as results reported in the literature.
Critical spilled volumes noted for all four runs were 4.8, 4.3, 4.15, and 3.9
cm3/cm2, respectively. Comparison of experimental results based on hydrostatic
conditions with the results predicted by different models reported in the literature were
also performed. Comparison on the basis of percentage error shows that the developed
mathematical model is the best predictor in all four cases (with percentage error of 5.8 to
10.7 , 3.7 to 19.7 , 0.6 to 6.1 , and 1.6 to 10.0  respectively). Inclusion ofwater table
fluctuation history in a hysteretic entrapment model was shown to have an impact on the
predictions. Hydrocarbon/groundwater interface fluctuations correlate inversely with the
hydrocarbon thickness in monitoring wells. It was noted that the amount of hydrocarbon
in the monitoring well was at a maximum when the water table elevation was at its
historically low value, and vice versa. Comparison with experimental results results
shows that the model predictions are in close agreement with the experimental data. The
model over predicted the results in the range of 16.2 to 85.1 , 7.9 to 47.2 , 6.4 to
70.3 , and 6.7 to 43.4  in all four cases respectively. It was found that the sensitivity of
the developed model with sand porosity and LNAPL density is quite low. Making the use
of the model more reliable.