Porosity is a critical volumetric parameter used to estimate the reserves for oil and gas
reservoirs and as an input for reservoir simulation. Porosity can be classified into
effective porosity (interconnected pores) and ineffective porosity (isolated pores) while
total porosity  is defined as the sum of effective porosity and the porosity associated
with clay bound water. In clean formations, total porosity is equal to effective porosity,
whereas in shaly formations it must be corrected for clay effect. Formation porosity can
be determined using several methods. These methods include: measuring actual porosity
in the core laboratory, Computerized Tomography (CT) scan, neutron density logging,
sonic tools and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance NMR logging tools. The NMR logging is
unique compared to all other methods since it is independent of the reservoir lithology. It
can be used to estimate the reservoir porosity directly without the knowledge of matrix
lithology. On the other hand, conventional logging such as neutron density and acoustic
depend strongly on lithology which might yield incorrect porosity measurement. Several
studies have been conducted to estimate porosity for both sandstone and carbonate
reservoirs using different logging tools, however, determining porosity is a challenge in
complex and unconventional lithologies. In sandstone, the presence of shale and clay
minerals will affect the response of all porosity tools. Carbonate is even more
complicated than sandstone due to its heterogeneity and triple porosity system (pores,
vugs, and fractures). In addition, the assessment of porosity measurements accuracy using
NMR logging was considered in this study. An attempt was made to develop an empirical
correlation from NMR data to obtain reliable porosity estimation. In this work, case
studies were presented using NMR logging tool to show how NMR reduces the
uncertainty of porosity measurements in carbonate reservoirs compared to other conventional logging tools, which improve reserves estimation. The study also showed
the effect of impurities in the carbonate formation porosity measurements by
conventional and NMR logging methods compared to stress core porosity by graphical
means. Results of this study showed that a clear criterion to divide the formations into
dolomitic and clean limestone formation should be established to get more accurate
result. In the dolomitic formation, Neutron Density showed the least AARE of 40.2 
compared to 84  for the NMR tool and 174  for the sonic tool. However, for clean
limestone formation NMR tool was the most accurate tool with AARE of 10  compared
to 14.3  for N D tool and 42.3  for sonic tool.