The condition of Indoor Environmental Quality (IEQ) in health care facilities is more
serious than other types of facilities simply because the level of quality required is
much higher. An appropriate IEQ in health care facilities results in a healing
environment and eventually increases the moral and productivity of occupants.
This study addresses the assessment of the IEQ factors; Jndoor Air Quality (IAQ),
Thermal Comfort, Visual Comfort and Acoustical Comfort in health care facilities. As
part of this study, an assessment procedure is developed for a comprehensive
assessment of the IEQ at health care facilities. In conjunction with the developed
procedure, health care facilities are classified, according to experts’ survey, into
various vicinities with respect to the importance of the IEQ factors. To do that, a
detailed subjective assessment in the form of questionnaires is conducted with 26
professionals in the fields of industrial hygiene and health care environments. The aim
of this categorization is to define the level of assessment for each IEQ factors in health
care facilities and to identify the frequency of conducting the assessment procedure.
Results from this study indicate that the IAQ was found to be the most critical and
dominant factor among the other IEQ qualifiers. Subsequently, the developed IEQ
assessment procedure for health care facilities gives a large emphasis on the IAQ at
these facilities. The remaining parts of the assessment procedure are designated for
the rest of the other IEQ qualifiers.
In addition, a trail based application of the IAQ assessment procedure was conducted
at an existing health care facility in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia to test facility management
readiness, availability of the required resources and occupants response towards a
successful implementation of the developed assessment procedure. Results indicate
that there is still much work to be done to improve the level of response and readiness
of facility management and occupants to allow for an effective utilization of the
developed procedure.