Rapid and accurate in situ measurement of soil properties is still a challenge facing the
construction industry and there is a need for new and advanced devices and methods.
Dynamic cone penetration test (DCPT) is an effective device used for field quality
assessment of soils. DCPT was used to predict the engineering properties of sand in which
it is difficult to obtain undisturbed sand samples. Furthermore, it is very difficult to
perform the conventional density tests, such as the sand replacement (sand cone) method,
especially when loose or submerged sandy soil is encountered.
This study was aimed to evaluate the effect of dry density, silt content and water level on
the shear strength and penetration resistance using DCPT for sands. The soil sample was
brought from a site near King Fahd University of Petroleum & Minerals and classified as
poorly graded sand (SP) according to USCS. DCPTs were performed on sand samples
with different silt content (1 , 4  and 8 ) and different relative densities (40 , 60 
and 90 ) where it was compacted in a large scale mold (1600 mm in diameter and 1500
mm height). Test results indicated that the increase in the dry density and silt content
increased the penetration resistance which means a decrease in the dynamic cone
penetration index (DCPI). Further, the results showed that variations in water table level
had a significant effect on DCPT results. In addition, the effective stress of sand was
changed due to pore water pressure in which the penetration resistance revealed out a
significant influence on the stiffness of sand. Regressions were developed to correlate the
various parameters.
In addition to the laboratory testing, a comprehensive field testing program conducted in
Al Jubail and Rass Al Khair was utilized to validate laboratory testing and evaluate the
potential use of the DCPT to assess the compaction during the construction of backfill.
DCPT has proven to be an effective tool in the assessment of compaction and density of
sand backfill, in the field.