A generalized film theory model for nonisothermal gas liquid reactions has been developed
including the possibility o f liquid evaporation. Irreversible (m,n)th reaction kinetics were considered
without a priori restrictions on the reaction regime, thus including the slow, fa st and instantaneous
reactions. The model considers the important aspects o f nonisothermal gas liquid reactions that were
mostly ignored in the literature. For the first time, three films were analyzed, a gas film, a liquid mass
transfer film and a liquid heat transfer film. The model equations were solved using the method o f
orthogonal collocations on finite elements with the application o f the software codes, COLNEW and A UTO.
Solution o f the model indicated the existence ofstatic bifurcation, or steady state multiplicity under
certain model parameters combinations. A comprehensive parametric study # a i carried out and the
sensitivity o f model parameters on the enhancement factor and surface temperature rise was tested. The
model parameters were shown to affect the possibility o f steady state multiplicity as well as the regions of
multiple steady states. An effective activation energy parameter was obtained by lumping the dimensionless
activation energies o f reaction and solubility parameters, also, an effective heat o f reaction and solution
parameter was obtained by lumping the dimensionless heats o f reaction and solution. No matter how the
individual parameters are changed, the model predictions will be the same as long as the lumped parameter
is kept constant. Parameter lumping way obtained through the physical understanding o f the model as well
as some trail and error computations. The model was applied to three industrial gas liquid reaction
systems, namely, the chlorination o f n decane, the sulfonation o f dodecylbenzene, and the chlorination of
toluene. For the first time, the local film model was linked with a global reactor design problem in the
differential form without using any approximation for the enhancement factor and the bulk liquid
concentration fo r the gas reactant. For demonstration purposes, an isothermal nonvolatile gas liquid
reaction case way considered using the chlorination o f n decane system in a non nonadiabatic CSTR. The
solution showed the existence ofsteady state multiplicityfor the global behavior o f the reactor.