High Level Synthesis (HLS) refers to the process of translating a high level specification
o f the behavior of a circuit into a structural design. The outcome is a net list of Register
Transfer Level (RTL) components, such as ALUs, registers and multiplexers.
Because of its complexity, HLS is broken into several steps, where a subset of the
overall problem is solved in each step. The steps move the source specification into a
target specification, through several intermediate forms.
Existing HLS systems fall into two broad categories. The first category takes a hardware
description language (HDL) as its source specification. Many structural biases are present
in all existing HDLs. These biases lead to a restricted view of the design space. For
the second category, a subset of some known high level programming language is used to
describe the behavior of the intended design. The identification o f the subset to use is a
problem by itself. Another problem is that the user must think within the boundary o f the
subset.
In this work we present a new approach to HLS, where the system takes its source
specification in any high level programming language, without any restrictions. This is
facilitated by the novel idea of  using the programming language compiler to produce the
first intermediate form in the transformation process. This first intermediate form is the
assembly language (AL). The use o f the high level language compiler serves two objectives.
The first is the utilization of the optimization carried out by the compiler. The second is
to avoid restricting the language to certain data types or control constructs.
Due to its machine dependency and complexity, AL is transformed into another form ,
which is machine independent and has simpler syntax and semantics. We refer to this
form as P s e u d o A ssem b ly L a n g u a g e (PAL). PAL descriptions are used by the system
components to produce the intended hardware in an RTL description language. AH PL is
used as an R TL description language in the system.
The major contributions of this work are the introduction o f this new methodology of
tackling HLS problem and the introduction of a new heuristic scheduling algorithm based
on the path based scheduling originally presented by R. Camposano in [21].