The unstable growth of mostly car based transportation system of Saudi Arabia
has led to noticeable urban traffic congestion which has emerged as a potential problem
in all large metropolitan cities in recent years. Therefore, proper understanding of the
unique traffic behavior in this region in order to improve traffic signal operation and
proper travel management is inevitable. Simulation modeling is an increasingly popular
and effective tool for analyzing transportation problems with the least cost. Recent
advancements in computer technology have led to the development of high fidelity
microscopic simulation models which is safer, less expensive and faster than field
implementation and testing. Testing road designs and traffic control systems, analysis of
intelligent transportation systems, evaluating traffic management schemes and
calibrating adaptive control systems are important applications of microscopic models.
Whilst the models are useful to the profession, they must be calibrated and validated
before they can be used to provide realistic results.
The main objective of this study is to calibrate and validate the microscopic traffic
simulation model PARAMICS to the traffic conditions in some selected urban arterials in
the city of Al Khobar, Saudi Arabia. PARAMICS is one of the few comprehensive
microscopic traffic simulators covering a wide range of traffic situations including traffic
and transit on urban roads and motorways. To achieve this main objective several default
values of the parameters such as driver familiarity, aggressiveness, mean target headway
and mean reaction time were modified to mimic the field conditions. An important step
of model calibration was to develop an Origin Destination (OD) matrix that represents
the turning volume count at the intersections. The results with modified values of selected
parameters showed satisfactory results between the models simulated Measure of
Effectiveness (MOE's) and the field observed MOE's. In order to use the calibrated model
regionally, the model was validated on a different network chosen in Al Khobar city
using a different data set. The result in validating the calibrated model was successful in
terms of pre set target criteria within an acceptable range. Later, using TRANSYT 7F
and SYNCHRO signal plans of the new network were optimized and used in
PARAMICS for further analysis.