The issue of linguistic errors among the Arabic language learners falls within the
framework of what is known as «contrastive linguistics». Therefore, the study of this topic
requires the adoption of a contrastive analysis, which seeks to account for the errors in the field
of language learning and acquisition.
This approach was implemented so as to develop language teaching methods and to
improve curricula and materials. This greatly helped learners avoid a lot of linguistic errors
resulting from language interference between the mother tongue and the target langue pertaining
to various levels of linguistic analysis; be they phonetic, morphological, structural, lexical,
semantic, and/or pragmatic. The concept of error is conventionally described as a digression or
deviation from the linguistic system at all its levels of analysis. In fact, error analysis is a
prominent phenomenon in the educational system as it is crucial to the actual language
performance both in its verbal or written forms.
Therefore, it is of massive importance to the actual language
performance both in its verbal or written forms Therefore, it is of massive importance to investigate into the underlying causes of these
errors so to describe them and to limit the scope of their repercussion.
There are many approaches that attempted to analyze and account for errors. There is, for
instance, the traditional approach. It is an old approach which deeply enrooted in the Arabic
culture. In the first three centuries (after Hijra) great efforts were done by traditional
grammarians to combat errors committed by the Arabic language speaker.
Today, the treatment of errors has improved within the framework of Applied
Linguistics. In this respect, specialists have developed new conceptions that allowed for (a)
practical solutions to some language teaching problems, including the mistakes done by mother
tongue speakers themselves; and (b) the depiction of the reasons responsible for the learners’ failure to improve their language skills. All this is discerned in the approaches results unveiled
by Applied Linguistics, ranging from contrastive analysis, passing by discourse analysis, and
ultimately arriving at the complimentary approach.
In this study, we addressed structural errors at Arabic language learners. We decided to
conduct our research among advanced Arabic language learners at Qatar University as a case
study,"
Our analysis was based on written samples to survey structural errors among the students.
Finally the study ended with a list of suggested recommendations that would hopefully help
avoiding difficulties in second language learning processes.
