Basement reservoirs can be of different types; fractured granitic, fractured
quartzite, and/ or fractured Schist and Gneiss. In the fractured basement reservoirs,
hydrocarbon is entrapped within the fractures network within the basement rocks.
Porosity and permeability in basement reservoirs is controlled by the fractures and not by
the rocks matrix as in the conventional reservoirs. Hydrocarbon hosted in fractured
basement reservoir was reported in many locations in Sudan since 2007 and the
Melutbasin is one of those areas. Mapping and characterization of faults and fractures in
those areas are important steps towards the quantification of hydrocarbon potentiality in
the region. The main objective of this study is to characterize and model fractures system
within the basement reservoir in Ruman area, Melut basin. The aim of this study is
tobetter understand those fractures origin, distribution and connectivity. To achieve the
goal of this study fractures, faults and lineaments were studied in different scales and
from surface and subsurface data; well data, gravity, seismic data and satellite images.
Obtained data wascharacterized base on orientation, length and intensity. Moreover;
geostatistical extrapolation for areas in between wells, stochastic and deterministic
models were also conducted to determine the Discrete Fracture Network (DFN) model.
Areas of fractures concentration and distribution were delineated using this technique.
Compatible and parallel NW SE, NNW SSE to N S, WNW  ESE to E W and NE SW
trends were observed from the interpreted data of satellite images, gravity, wells and
seismic data. It is evident from Rose Diagrams generated for the faults detected from
seismic dataand fracturesobserved from the FMI log of five wells that they are having
similar trends. The same trends can also be noticed in gravity data and lineaments
determined from satellite images. Three stages model were proposed for the origin of the
fractures associated with the basement; fractures developed during the emplacement and
cooling of the igneous pluton, fractures related to the Proterozoic tectonic events and
faults related fractures (developed during Melut basin rifting).The outcome of this study
delineated the possible origins of the fractures system hosting hydrocarbon in the
basement rocks. Additionally the study characterized and defined the possible trends of
those fractures and how are they related to different origin. The study also addressed the
possible role of the major faults in hydrocarbon migration.From the in situ stress
analysis, faults and fractures trends were tested for the most susceptible at present
day.The study outcomes and methodology can be used for hydrocarbon exploration and
development in this area and for other areas of similar geological structural settings.