Duplex stainless steels have approximately equal volume fractions of austenite
and ferrite phases. These alloys are becoming widely used in the oil and gas industry,
particularly in offshore structures and flowlines, due to their excellent combination of
mechanical properties and superior resistance to chloride stress corrosion cracking
when compared to the widely used austenitic stainless grades.
The present study was aimed to investigate fatigue crack growth resistance of
duplex stainless steel in a corrosive aqueous solution and to examine the effect of
chromate inhibition thereof. Fatigue crack growth rates of Zeron 100 duplex stainless
steel were measured at a stress ratio of 0.1 in three different environments: air, pure
3.5  NaCl, and chromate (NaaCrCL) containing 3.5  NaCl solution at 1 Hz frequency
under constant amplitude fatigue loading. Two specimen orientations were considered
TL and LT. Fatigue crack growth rates in 3.5  NaCl were higher than those in air
throughout the range of AK tested with greater environmental enhancement in TL
orientation. Fracture surface examination revealed ductile fracture at low AK and
ductile fatigue striations at high AK in air for both orientations. At low AK values in
3.5  NaCl, austenite exhibited ductile fracture while ferrite showed brittle features. At
high AK values, however, brittle striations in ferrite and ductile striations in austenite
were observed. Enhancement in fatigue crack growth rates in 3.5  NaCl was attributed
to hydrogen embrittlement of ferrite phase.
The effect of inhibition on corrosion fatigue of duplex stainless steel was
studied at 0.02M and 0.2M chromate concentrations. Inhibition of 3.5  NaCl with
0.02M chromate reduced corrosion fatigue crack growth rates up to a specific value of
AK, above which crack growth rates approached those in the uninhibited solution.
Chromate concentration of 0.2M demonstrated effective inhibition throughout the
tested range of AK. Scratch tests at constant open circuit potential were performed to
characterize the effect of chromate concentration on repassivation kinetics of the duplex
alloy. Chromate inhibition effectiveness during corrosion fatigue was proposed to
correlate with repassivation kinetics and the crack tip strain rate for a given chloride
concentration.