This study aims at development of a computational model and experimental study
of moisture diffusion and shrinkage in cementitious repair materials to evaluate
the suitability of a cementitious repair mortar for shrinkage performance. Timedependent
moisture loss in a cementitious repair material was modeled using moisture
diffusion theory. The problem of moisture diffusion is highly non linear with the
diffusixrity Ke depending on the moisture content C. Two finite element codes MSTDIFF1
and MSTDIFF2 have been developed which handle one  and two dimensional
moisture diffusion through cementitious materials, respectively. The relationship between
the diffusivity Ke and moisture content C , required for the prediction of moisture
loss, was established using experimental data of changes in moisture content C
at different depths from the drying surface for different drying times. Free shrinkage
strains c,/, in the repair material were determined experimentally and related to the
moisture loss M . The relationship established between free shrinkage strains esh and
moisture loss M can be used to determine the free shrinkage strains for different
values of moisture loss in the repair material.
Free shrinkage strains eth were fed into a finite element based stress analysis
program STRSRSYS developed to predict the shrinkage stresses in the repair overlay/
substrate concrete system. The suitability of a cementitious repair material for
shrinkage performance was evaluated by comparing the stresses developed in the repair
material with the permissible maximum stresses. The results of this study show
that use of a moisture dependent diffusivity K c simulates the problem of moisture
diffusion through the material more accurately. Free shrinkage strains were noted
not to vary linearly with moisture loss, rendering the practice of solving directly
the shrinkage diffusion equation questionable. The commercial repair material used
yielded high free shrinkage strains resulting in high tensile and shear stresses. The
ultimate free shrinkage strain of the repair material had the most significant effect
on the level of induced stresses in the repair overlay/substrate concrete system. The
restraint provided by the concrete substrate as well as the elastic modulus of the
repair material had a significant effect on the level of induced stresses