The present work is but a small contribution to an emerging multidisciplinary area o f research with considerable
potential about durability problems in concrete. Deterioration of concrete infrastructures resulting from physicalchemical
attack by deleterious species accounts for a large proportion of durability problems. However, for
sustainable development and associated social and economic concerns, it is necessary that the infrastructures retain
their required durability and structural performance over the long term. The need for models that empower
durability analysis and ordering of management systems such as schedule of repairs, service life design, service
life prediction, as well as forensics that describe the deterioration mechanisms involved is imperative.
Most o f these durability problems result from individual but often synergetic mechanisms o f chemical attack
following transport of deleterious species such as heat, moisture, chloride ions, carbondioxide, and sulfate ions
into the concrete. For realistic conditions to which concrete structures are subjected in the field, the coupled impact
o f mechanically induced damage cannot also be ignored. Mitigation against such individual or coupled
deterioration mechanisms can be made possible by scientifically studying the behavior o f the various energy/mass
transfers, chemical reactions, and force mechanics that contribute to the degradation mechanism. Yet, most current
mitigation methods for concrete degradation are empirical and depend on rule o f thumb or curve fitting of
extrapolations that are scientifically uncertain and therefore devoid o f firm physical, chemical and mechanical
foundations for prediction purposes.
In this study, analysis of durability and structural behavior of concrete under prescribed coupled chemomechanical
conditions was proposed, formulated and implemented in a computational framework. The governing
mathematical equations that idealize the tripartite physical chemical mechanical phenomena modeled into the
framework are nonlinear and have to therefore be solved numerically. They were resolved in space using finite
element method and in time using finite difference time stepping scheme that are together capable of handling any
geometry, prescribed initial and boundary conditions as well as material nonlinearities expected to occur during
the service life o f the concrete host structure.
Dubbed SConDur2D, which stands for 2 Dimensional Synergetic Concrete Durability, the computational
framework developed is an amalgam of two other separate but operationally interlaced computational systems
called ConTra2D and LoiDam2D. ConTra2D, which stands for 2D CONcrete TRAnsport, models the most
significant transport reaction phenomena that contribute to the rate and amount o f the concrete material
deteriorating. It specifically models not only individual transport reaction processes of various energies/species
attributable to heat, moisture, chlorides, carbondioxide and/or sulfates, but also their synergetic influence on one
another as experimentally observed in practice. LoiDam2D, which stands for 2D LOad Induced DAMage, uses
continuum damage mechanics to quantify load induced material defects or damage in concrete.
The centerpiece o f the SConDur2D analysis framework developed in this study is the balance between the
modular and coupled appeal o f its operations. Despite the coupled appeal, the ConTra2D and LoiDam2D programs
integrated within the framework underscores an equally modular appeal that makes it possible to simulate various
dependent and independent durability mechanics problems. In this study, sulfate attack simulations were
conducted to demonstrate the predictive capability and adequate sensitivity o f the SConDur2D analysis framework
for parameters germane to the problem. In particular, the evaluation o f strength reduction in concrete subjected to
gypsum based sulfate attack mechanisms were carried out. In this regard, a good agreement was reported when
model results in this study were compared to experimental data in the literature.