To make an optimum use of Self Compacting Concrete (SCC), especially when planning
the casting of concrete in complicated structures, simulation may serve as a tool in the
construction and formwork design as well as determining the desired rheological
parameters for a robust mix design of SCC.
The aim of this research work is the development and validation of the hydrodynamics of
the flow behavior of SCC made from local materials found in Saudi Arabia using a
continuum (single fluid) approach. Navier Stoke’s equations that govern the flow were
used to obtain numerical solution of the problem using computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) commercial software that enabled the tracking, in time and space, of material
motion with any type of material behavior, including non linear and time dependent
ones. The problem is characterized by free surface flow of a non Newtonian fluid. While
the rheological behavior can be described by means of a Bingham model, some extra
phenomenon occurs in case of SCC, like shear thickening and sometimes significant
thixotropy. For that reason, the Bingham behavior in combination with shear thickening
and thixotropy was modeled in the software package FLUENT by means of a userdefined
thixotropy model. Validation of the simulation results was achieved by using
experimental data from a series of tests conducted at KFUPM using different SCC mixes
to obtain the critical range of rheological parameters of yield stress and viscosity for
robust mixes.
In addition, a new finite element model for the lateral pressure evolution in formwork
due to SCC was developed in which the effects of thixotropy and casting rate were
incorporated. Experimental investigation was conducted to verify the model developed
for the lateral pressure evolution due to SCC and prediction of flow behavior during the
full scale casting of a slab. More experimental data from the literature were used to
further validate the developed finite element model in this study. Simulation runs of fullscale
casting of the slab were also carried out to study the effect of the rheological
parameters on the flow of this material.
A successful validation of the CFD simulations and the finite element model’s
predictions shows a good correlation with the conducted experimental results and those
from the literature