Due to the rise in demand and price of propylene over ethylene, the need to increase the
selective production of propylene is necessary. Our study focuses on developing a one
dimensional zeolite which is suitable for the selective cracking of light naphtha (using nhexane
as a model reactant) to produce propylene. In order to achieve this, we studied
the effect of the incorporation of a nonionic surfactant in the synthesis of Mobil Twenty
Three (MTT) zeolite, a one  dimensional 10 membered ring (10 MR) zeolite via a
microwave reactor. Incorporation of nonionic polyoxyethylene 20 stearyl ether (Brij 78)
surfactant into a synthesis mixture of SiO2 Al2O3   NaOH  Brij 78   isopropyl amine  
H2O at different Brij 78/SiO2 ratio (0, 0.04 and 0.07) was studied with different synthesis
aging time of 5, 24 and 48 h. The Taguchi method and the Pareto Analysis of variance
were used to investigate the effects of Brij 78/SiO2 ratio and synthesis aging time on assynthesized
samples Brunauer Emmett Teller (BET) surface area and mean crystal
length. In order to minimize diffusion and mass transfer problems in our catalyst, we
focused on minimizing catalyst mean crystal length and maximizing catalyst BET surface
area. Characterization techniques such as X ray diffraction (XRD), BET, Field Emission
Scanning Electron Microscope FESEM, energy dispersive X ray (EDX) and twenty
seven aluminum nuclear magnetic resonance (27Al NMR) were used. Pure Rod like MTT
zeolite phase were obtained with crystal length in the submicron to nanometer range Both Taguchi and Pareto analysis show that aging time of synthesis precursor is more
significant with minimal competition from Brij 78/SiO2 ratio in reducing mean crystal
length and increasing BET surface area of catalyst. Catalytic test of MTT zeolite in the
cracking of n hexane shows good selectivity and yield towards olefins. Also, Propylene
to ethylene ratio (P/E) of ~2.5 was recorded for evaluated catalyst. Furthermore, increase
in catalyst activity and resistance to deactivation was observed after desilication followed
by mild dealumination