Stainless steel rods are coated by ultra thin polyelectrolyte multilayers. Multilayer
systems are prepared using the method o f layer by layer self assembly. This method
involves alternating exposure o f a charged substrate to solutions o f positive and negative
polyelectrolytes, respectively, with rinse step in between to remove any extra material
that is loosely bound to the surface.
Cationic polyallylamine hydrochloride (PAH) is used with anionic polystyrene sulfonate
(PSS), polystyrene sulfonate co maleic acid (PSS co MA) and polyacrylic acid (PAA) in
order to investigate the effect o f changing the acidic strength o f the anionic
polyelectrolyte on the corrosion protection performance. Cationic
polydiallyldimethylammonium chloride (PDADMAC) is used with anionic sulfonated
polyetherether ketone (SPEEK) with three different ion exchange capacities to investigate
the effect o f changing the level o f ionic charge o f the polyelectrolytes on the corrosion
properties. We investigated the corrosion properties o f 316 stainless steel wires coated
with PEMs o f hydrophobically modified cationic PDADMAC and anionic PSS. The
effect of hydrophobic modification o f polyelectrolytes on the corrosion properties of the
coated rods is investigated using poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride codiallyldodecylammonium
chloride) (PDADMAC co DADDAC) and  poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride co diallyloctadecylammonium chloride)
(PDADMAC co DAODAC). (PDADMAC co DADDAC) contained 3, 6 and 9.8
mole  o f the hydrophobic comonomer diallyldodecylammonium chloride, while
(PDADMAC co DAODAC) contained 3.6, 7.7, 10 and 15.6 mole  of
diallyloctadecylammonium chloride.
By applying different corrosion tests to the coated rods, the effects of hydrophobic
modification o f polyelectrolyte and other different parameters on the corrosion is
investigated.
The corrosion rates o f the coated rods with different number o f layers are always less
than that o f the uncoated samples.