A study was conducted to investigate the effectiveness of combined processes of
electrooxidation and electrocoagulation using stainless steel electrodes for the removal of
BOD, ammonia, coliform, turbidity and total suspended solids. In addition to total
organics, removal o f soluble and particulate organics was also investigated. Experiments
were also conducted with filtered samples to study the effect o f suspended solids on the
electrooxidation of soluble BOD and ammonia. Comparative jar test experiments were
conducted with FeCU coagulant, to compare the sludge production by electrocoagulation
with chemical addition process.
Combined processes were proved effective for the removal o f BOD. Most o f the removal
of BOD was contributed by the removal o f particulate organics by electrocoagulation.
Significant effect o f current and contact time was observed on the removal o f the above
contaminants. BOD removal increased with the increase in current and contact time up to
0.2 A, beyond which, further increase in current (i.e. at 0.4 and 0.8 A) resulted in the
decrease in the removal efficiency. The maximum removal o f 84.82   was observed at
0.2 A and 50 minutes contact time. Ammonia removal on stainless steel electrodes was
not efficient. Maximum removal o f only 18.13   was observed at 0.2 A and 50 minutes
contact time. Coliform removal was observed to be directly dependent on applied current
and contact time. Maximum removal o f 5.05 log scale removal was observed at 0.8 A and
30 minutes contact time. High removal o f turbidity and total suspended solids (93.33 and
95.38  ) was achieved by the combined processes. Experiments with filtered samples
resulted in the increase in the removal o f soluble BOD and ammonia thus shows that there
is an effect o f suspended solids on the electrooxidation of contaminants. Sludge
production by electrochemical process was observed to be 2.45 less than the conventional
coagulation process. However, when the sample pH was altered fi'om 7.07 to 9.11,
marked decrease in the optimum dosage was observed, and the sludge production was
observed to be 2.95 times less than the electrocoagulation process.