A multidisciplinary approach (including thin section petrography, heavy mineral analysis,
trace element chemistry, scanning electron microscopy and X ray diffractometiy) was utilized to
investigate the depositional environments and provenance of the sediments of the Lower
Paleozoic Wajid Sandstone exposed in the Abha Khamis Mushayt area of southwestern Saudi
Arabia. The origin of the associated ferruginous horizons and kaolinitic claystone was also
investigated. The Wajid Sandstone in the stady area is represented by an approximately 300m
thick sequence of medium to coarse grained, poor to well sorted, mineralogically mature, pebbly
sandstone and conglomerate. On the basis o f color and abundance o f ferruginous horizons, the
sequence was divided into two units ; a lower Red Unit and an upper Grey Unit
The dominance of zircon, tourmaline and rutile in the heavy mineral suites of the Wajid
Sandstone supports the mineralogical maturiry of the sediments. The overall optical attributes
(color, crystal types, inclusions e.t.c) of these heavy minerals indicate an acidic to intermediate
source terrain. The presence of epidote and kvanite indicates contributions from metamorphic
terrain. The association of high Si02, AlzOyTiOz with low concentrations of P2O5, CaO, MgO,
T i02, Cr, Co, Ni and V indicates a dominantly intermediate to felsic source terrain. The values of
the Cr/Ni, V/Cr and V/Ni ratios are also in agreement with the inferred felsic to intermediate
source terrain. The factor and cluster associations of the trace elements Cr, Co, Ni, Sr and V also
support this interpretation.
The mineralogical maturity of the sediments (over 95  quartz), indicates a stable
cratonic setting of the source terrains. A tecnEncally stable continental margin was inferred from
the plots of the normalized A120 3 and Fe20 ^ and Al20 3 /(Al20 3 +Fe2C>3) versus Fez03/Ti02  The
bivariate plots of K20/Na20 and Si02 also fevor a passive margin tectonic environment with
minor oceanic island arc influence. Paleocurrunt distribution (mainly northern orientation), heavy
mineral and trace element chemistry as well as the regional tectonic framework suggest highlands
in Yemen as the major source of the sediments. Minor variability of the paleocurrent distribution
in the northeast direction suggests the Arabian Shield as an additional source of the sediments.
The overall textural attributes, sedimentary structure (mainly large scale, low angle crossbedding
and cross lamination), paleocurrenr orientation and facies geometry (vertically stacked
blocky sand bodies, channel fills and bars) indicate a braided river depositional environment.
SEM and XRD studies showed that authfgenic hematite and goethite are the dominant iron
minerals of the Red Unit. The observed textural morphologies from SEM study showed that the
associated claystone is mainly composed o f amhigenic kaolinite.