Introduction: The marine oil pollution is considered as one of the most challenges that
the State of Qatar faces. Qatar is one of the largest oil producing countries. From one
side, oil production and export is required to face the progress of civilization,
infrastructural and economic renaissance, And from the other side to avoid the negative
effects of production and refining that led to pollution in Qatari natural environment
particularly the marine system.
Objectives: To highlight the problem of marine oil pollution in the State of Qatar, the
national environmental policies (which include regional and international laws and
conventions) and their effectiveness in the reduction of marine oil pollution, evaluation
of the concerned individuals and institutions willingness to support the adopted
policies in the state to combat oil marine pollution and their success in the application.
Methodology:A descriptive cross sectional study was conducted. A proportionate
random sampling was done with a sample size of 88 experts working in the field of
combating marine oil pollution in Qatar. A self administered questionnaire was
conducted. The Statistical package for Social Sciences (SPSS) program version 22 was
used for data entry and analysis. Appropriate statistical tests were used and ethical
considerations were followed throughout the study.
Results: The main results of descriptive analysis
The analysis shows that highest percentage was 88.6  . It reflects the readiness of
individuals to support policies. Considering that oil is the most serious non green
products on the state was represented by 81.8 , while 86.4  are aware of the
terminology and facts related to combating marine oil pollution. Also, about 74 
assert that national policy has a positive impact in combating marine oil pollution. 70.5
  of respondents assured that there is no communication with experts on combating oil
pollution policies. Similarly, 61.4  of the experts confirmed that there are strict
relevant policies in the states, while 54.5  stressed there is incomplete view of the tasks of policy. Furthermore, a considerable views which reaches 52.2   of
respondents evident that their organizations are supportive of the changes, and pointed
to the need for increased advertising and awareness campaigns. They also pointed to
the lack of encouragement of incentives for workers with a percentage of 40.9  . In
addition, 34  of the sample believes that the procedures are not documented in either
Arabic or in foreign languages, while 31.9  regard the importance of empowering
human resources professionalism level.