In this thesis, work is done in two fold. First, a generalized Photovoltaic (PV) array
simulator is developed in MATLAB/Simulink based on the five parameters equivalent
electric circuit model. The values of the five unknown parameters are estimated using a
stochastic optimization technique. Estimation problem is converted into an optimization
problem where Differential Evolution (DE) as an efficient optimizing technique is
employed to identify the model parameters at Standard Test Condition (STC) using only
the data provided by the manufacturer. The effectiveness of the proposed method is
analyzed by estimating the parameters of six PV panels of three different technologies
and comparing the determined I V curves with the experimental curves given in the
datasheets. These identified parameters are then used to develop a precise PV simulator
which is flexible enough to simulate any number of PV panels connected in series and
parallel. The robustness of the proposed simulator is demonstrated under partial shaded
conditions and its performance is verified by interfacing it with an actual power
electronics converter and Maximum Power Point Tracking (MPPT) controller. Second, an efficient Adaptive Neuro Fuzzy Inference System (ANFIS) based MPPT
controller is proposed that extract maximum possible power from PV under all operating
condition. The proposed ANFIS based MPPT controller has the capacity to track the
optimum point under rapidly changing irradiation conditions with less fluctuations in
steady state as compared to the conventional MPPT methods. Nonlinear time domain
simulations have been carried out to assess the effectiveness of the proposed controllers
under different disturbances and compared with the performance of conventional
Incremental Conductance (InCond) method. The obtained results demonstrate that the
proposed ANFIS based MPPT controller has better dynamic and steady state
performance than the conventional method. Finally, its performance is investigated
experimentally where Real Time Digital Simulator (RTDS) is utilized to simulate a PV
system in real time and proposed ANFIS based MPPT controller is developed in
dSPACE DS1104. The experimental results are compared with those obtained from
MATLAB simulation to assess the validity and accuracy of the proposed controller.
Simulation and experimental results show that the proposed ANFIS based MPPT has fast
dynamic response and fewer fluctuations in the steady state as compare to conventional
InCond method.