The Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) parameters were studied to selectively
synthesize Carbon Nano Tubes (CNT’s). Experimental runs using Vertical
Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) reactor were performed at a fixed reaction time
of one hour and different operating temperatures (700 1000 Co), hydrogen flow
rates (100 3000 mL/mint) and P xylene flow rates (5 40 mL/hr). Ferrocene [Fe
(C5H5)2] catalyst was used in the process in the form of powder which is mixed and
dissolved with P xylene (C8H10) at a ratio of 1  of Fe (50 mL solvent, 1.6 g
Ferrocene) to the hydrocarbon. The P xylene as the source of the hydrocarbon was
cracked by hydrogen while argon gas was used to flush the CVD reactor to prevent
oxidation of the catalytic metal at the reaction temperatures. Effects of the various
operating parameters on the yield and quality of CNT’s such as temperature and
the flow rates of hydrocarbon and hydrogen are presented in this study. The
effects of the different reaction conditions on the CNT’s yield and various
dimensions of the CNTs formed were also investigated. A design of experiment package was used for the generation and evaluation of statistical experimental
designs. A 3k statistical factorial design approach was adopted to develop the
mathematical models in order to study and optimize the operating conditions.
Multiple Linear Regression (MLR) was used to fit the mathematical models. The
morphologies of the CNTs were characterized and examined by Scanning Electron
Microscopy (SEM) at different growth temperatures for the surface morphology of
the samples and Thermal Gravity Analyzer (TGA) was used to analyze purity of
CNT’s. A design of experiment optimizer was used to find the optimum
conditions for the yield and quality of CNT’s where optimum yield was found to
be at a temperature of 892 Co and H2 flow rate of 1497 mL/mint with P xylene rate
of 5 mL/hr. However, to control quality, higher H2 flow rate (3000 mL/mint) need
to be considered to improve average diameters and aspect ratios of the produced
CNT’s.