School buildings are characterized as being envelope load dominated buildings.
Hence, they are greatly influenced by the outside climatic conditions. Due to the harsh
climate of Saudi Arabia, government buildings including school buildings on average
consume more than 11  of the total energy used. The bulk of this energy is consumed by the
air conditioning systems, which remove a substantial amount of gained heat due to poor
thermal envelope performance. Therefore, proper design and selection of components of the
building envelope at early stages of the design process can greatly help in achieving thermal
comfort with minimum reliance on air conditioning systems, and also minimizing energy
requirements.
This research aimed to evaluate the thermal performance and the impact of the critical
parameters of building envelope on the annual required cooling and total energy of school
buildings. In order to achieve this, a typical school building was developed as a base case.
Envelope design practices were defined and twelve design parameters were selected for the
base case to represent the wide variation of thermal characteristics.
The energy performance of a typical school building in Dhahran is evaluated under
various envelope designs using different envelope design components that cover a wide
range of thermal characteristics. This evaluation was performed using the energy simulation
program Visual DOE. Parametric analysis was conducted for wall and roof designs, glazing
types, window to wall ratio (WWR), orientation, various air infiltrations and combination of
envelope design parameters. Initially, for each envelope design parameter a few relevant
types of designs were selected that are currently used for buildings in this region. Then,
among the selected types of designs the most appropriate type of design was selected for
each envelope design parameter. Finally, these selected types of designs were combined to
produce an effective envelope design. The cooling and total energy consumption of a typical
school building in Dhahran was reduced by 30.6  and 18.1 , respectively. The combined
design alternative also produced significant reductions in the school building's cooling load.
As a result, the air conditioning systems' capacity can be reduced as much as 40  for the
school buildings constructed in the future. Finally, envelope thermal design guidelines were
developed for school buildings in hot humid climates of Saudi Arabia.