a radical change in perspective and spirit through which language is taught. The
epistemological transformation witnessed by generative linguistics specifically led to
changing many of the concepts and perceptions that were prevailing in older language
studies. Most notably was the transformation of linguists  interest in the study of language
to the study of the cognitive pattern inherent in the linguistic behavior. Accordingly
linguistic theories became divergent and their trends became numerous towards the
position of the linguistic model of the linguistic potency. As the advocates of the lexical
approach considered "Lexicon" as the essential ingredient in the linguistic model, the topic
of lexical research became "lexical potency" of the speaker of a certain language. By
lexical potency is meant a "mental lexicon" which is considered a part of the linguistic
potency that grows in stages. It is represented in the vocabulary stock acquired by the
speaker in his own language, and gets consciously aware of all the properties (phonetic,
syllabic, morphological, syntactic, semantic and pragmatic) associated with such stock.
Hence the research topic was based on this concept, through raising several questions,
including                                                                                                                                                                                                                          „h What is the concept of mental lexicon?
„h What are its characteristics, components and functional mechanisms?
„h How is it represented in a child  s mind?
„h How does it grow?
„h Are children different in their development level of the mental lexicon?
„h What are the factors influencing this growth?
There are other questions that this research aims to answer in the light of the focus on
the psychological nature of this organ, taking advantage of the studies and results reached
by psychological linguistics in this area.
After the theoretical analysis and the utilization of the givens of lexical theorization, the
researcher conducted a field study on thirty Qatari male and female children attending the
primary school, of whom ten are at the age of seven, ten at the age of nine, and ten at the
age of eleven. They were selected in accordance with specific conditions from two
Independent school in the city of Doha affiliated to SEC, in order to answer the research
questions.
This will be done through an interview that includes a range of dialogue questions, a
written test prepared by the candidate to try to measure the lexical entries   growth, in
addition to  §drawing the man test  and a form that includes a lot of information for
children. A set of results have been reached, including:
„h Mental lexicon grows and develops gradually with children  s growth and
development in general.
„h Lexical stock and entries grow proportionally with the advancement of children  s
chronological age.
„h There are statistically significant differences in the growth levels of lexical entries
in children of different ages.
„h Semantic features achieved the highest average in the lexical entries   growth
among children of different age groups.
iii
„h The least lexical entries growth feature among children of different age groups was
the structural ones.
Taking into account the results of this research, and adopting its recommendations,
will inevitably be beneficial to the Qatari society, which seeks to formulate a vision for the
future of children  s culture. This is evident in the following procedures:
„h Child Preparation Centers whose task is to educate children according to clear
determinants linked to faith and heritage,
„h Specific initiatives offered by society in the field of child care, linguistic and
cognitive empowerment, especially child oriented initiatives launched by Her
Highness Shaikha Moza Nasser Al Misned,
„h Finally, Qatar National Vision 2030, which aspires to develop human capital
through the creation of a national network for education that endeavors to equip
children with the necessary skills and high motivation to contribute to the building
of their society.