demand grows are not sufficient on the long term basis. Demand is increasing
faster at peak times than at other times. Besides, it takes several years to build a new
power plant. Investments in peak generation as well as in transmission and distribution are
not economically justified. For many utilities, it is more cost effective to fully utilize
what they have rather than try to build new power plants. More and more utilities are
extending their activities into the customer’s side. They are implementing the Demand
Side Management(DSM) programs. The electricity distribution companies use either the
Direct Load Control(DLC) or the indirect load control. There are different systems to
apply the DLC. However, these systems suffer from shortcomings. A new DLC system is
proposed in this thesis to overcome the drawbacks of the existing systems.
A new DLC system is designed in this thesis. It is proposed to use this system as
one of the alternatives of the DSM programs. The proposed DLC system satisfies the
utility objectives and the customer requirements.
The system has three main parts. The first part is a master station center at the utility side.
It consists of a PC. The second part is the control device that is installed at the customer
side. It is a Programmable Logic Controller (PLC). The third part is the interface circuits
between the control device and the PC, and between the PLC and the loads. Two
sophisticated programs are developed to serve the purpose of the proposed DLC system.
One is stored in the PLC to direct control the customer loads. The other is used as user
interface and PC protocol to control the installed PLC at the customer side. The control
strategy is done through different scenarios.
A prototype system is designed, implemented and evaluated. The propsed DLC
system is studied on a real life case. The results of the experiments and the study show
that there is a demand reduction in the load curve. The proposed DLC system meets the
objective that it is designed for