Dynamic analysis and control of the microgrids have received much attention recently. A
microgrid is a distributed generation unit connected close to a cluster of loads. It can be
operated in either a grid connected mode or an autonomous mode to achieve some
operational requirements in each mode. The stability and the effectiveness of control in
the inverter based distributed generation interfacing have faced the challenge of the
uncertain and dynamic nature of the distribution network. The droop characteristics are
used to manage power sharing between distributed generators in the autonomous mode
while the power controllers are used in grid connected mode.
A new technique for stability enhancement of a microgrid operating in both autonomous
and grid connected modes is proposed in this thesis. Linear and nonlinear models of
microgrids operating in different modes are developed. Optimal designs of LC filter,
controller parameters, and damping resistance are carried out for the case of the gridconnected
mode. On the other hand, controller parameters and power sharing coefficients
are optimized for the case of the autonomous mode. The control problem has been
formulated as an optimization problem where particle swarm optimization is employed to
search for optimal settings of the optimized parameters in each mode. In addition,
nonlinear time domain based as well as eigenvalue based objective functions are
proposed to minimize the error in the measured power and to enhance the damping characteristics. The nonlinear time domain simulation has been carried out to assess the
effectiveness of the proposed controllers under different disturbances and loading
conditions. The obtained results demonstrate a high dynamic performance with efficient
damping characteristics of the microgrid considered in this study. At the end, the stability
of the microgrid has been investigated in the Real Time Digital Simulator (RTDS)
environment. The obtained RTDS results are compared with those obtained from
MATLAB simulation to assess the validity and accuracy of the proposed controller
model. The obtained results of the RTDS illustrate that the optimal proposed controller
not only ensures fast response, perfect tracking for its reference values with no significant
overshoot and delay time but also improve the system stability.