This study is focused to evaluate performance o f three types o f commercially
available GFRP bars after they are subjected to accelerated aggressive exposure
conditions such as alkaline environment, alkaline + sabkha environment, alkaline +
seawater environment, thermal variation and outdoor environment fo r stand alone bars
and bars in concrete beams. It also includes comparison and correlation between the
changes in tensile strength, compressive strength and water absorption properties o f
three types o f GFRP bars. An attempt had also been made to predict strength and service
life o f GFRP bars. Lastly the effective cover thickness required fo r GFRP bars in
concrete structures when subjected to different levels o f thermal loads are determined.
The work includes a thorough literature review on durability o f GFRP bars,
extensive exposure set up, monitoring o f results up to one year fo r stand alone bars and
two years fo r concrete beam. Finally strength and service life was predicted. The
experimental results showed that the three commercially available GFRP bars though
have glass as common material but have different durability performance. This can be
attributed mainly to the difference in resin type, manufacturing process and surface
treatment. The Fulcrum GFRP type demonstrated best performance followed by C bar
and then Aslan 100 in all aspects o f tension behavior under the different exposure
conditions. It is confirmed from experimental results that Alkaline is the most basic
deteriorating environment fo r GFRP bars which caused damaged up to 65  in Aslan
100.
The service life was predicted using Time Shift Factor method and Ficks first law
was used to determine strength prediction. It was found that FULCRUM needs
approximately 25 years to have only 10  reduction in its tensile strength. From the
concrete cover experiments, it was evident that a minimum concrete cover o f three times
diameter fo r any GFRP bar is required to avoid cracking under thermal loads.