The work in thesis aims at developing an efficient unidirectional Time Domain technique for modeling the propagation of short and ultra short pulsed optical beams in devices containing dispersive material. The non paraxial Time Domain Beam Propagation Method (TD BPM) has been developed and used for this purpose. The method relies on the classical BPM style of expanding the wave equation as a one way longitudinal operator while retaining the time variation as another variable along with the other transverse spatial variables. This arrangement allows the numerical time window to follow the propagation of the pulse and hence minimizes computer resource requirements. To account for the fast variation of short and ultra short pulses, the method uses higher order rational Padé approximants to overcome the paraxial limitation. The use of several iterative numerical techniques, to solve the complex sparse matrix operator of the TD BPM, showed a remarkable speed up factors compared to the direct matrix solver in both implementations of non dispersive and dispersive applications. In order to verify and assess the results of the TD BPM, the explicit FDTD has been formulated and implemented. In this thesis, Lorentz dispersive model of GaAs and AlGaAs has been used in all implementations. Being an implicit method, the TD BPM converges using large time and longitudinal step sizes compared to the explicit FDTD step sizes. The assessment of the TD BPM includes application to 1 D and 2 D of dispersive material and structures. Full numerical analysis of important numerical parameters and dispersive coefficients has been carried out to assess the relationship between these variables. It has been noticed that the developed TD BPM is very stable, accurate and efficient in modeling short and ultra short pulse propagation in structures containing dispersive materials. The aim of second part of this thesis is to study the propagation of short and ultra short optical pulses in directional coupler structures containing dispersive materials. Pulse spread due to material dispersion and intermodal dispersion of directional couplers has been modeled accurately. As the initial pulse duration decreases the pulse spread increases during power exchange mechanism between the two waveguides along the longitudinal direction. Eventually the pulse breaks up which gives rise to distortion. It was found that the existence of material dispersion speeds up the pulse break up phenomena in a shorter distance. Thus, the efficient TD BPM was implemented and compared with the existing FDTD technique for the observation of the complex optical behavior inside various photonic device structures containing dispersive and non dispersive material.