Scalar multiplication is the basic operation in elliptic curve cryptography that can
be performed by many algorithms. These algorithms multiply a scalar value K with an
elliptic curve base point P. One of the crucial decisions when implementing an efficient
elliptic curve cryptosystem is deciding which point coordinate system to use. The point
coordinate system used for addition and doubling of points on the elliptic curve
determines the efficiency of these routines, and hence the efficiency of the basic
cryptographic operation, scalar multiplication. Although using a fixed coordinate system
enhances the performance of the scalar multiplication, (by removing the intermediate
inversion operations), it becomes a security weakness since it can be exploited by
projective coordinates leak attacks to reveal some secure information. Therefore, finding a
coordinate system that can enhance the performance of the scalar multiplication and being
secure against such attacks is desired goal.
This thesis introduces a new approach called Dynamic Projective Coordinate
(DPC) system. DPC provides a framework that automates the selection of the projective
coordinate system and uses a single mathematical formulation/software code to implement different projective coordinate systems. This framework allows the
computing/encrypting device to select the projective coordinate either at random, or
according to a certain rule.
DPC uses dynamic transformation functions to convert coordinates of any point on
the elliptic curve to any projective coordinates by using the same mathematical formula.
These transformation functions are used to develop dynamic addition and doubling
formulas for elliptic curve over the prime field GF(p) and over the binary field GF(2m).
Also, this thesis proposes a new classification method for Side Channel Attacks
(SCA). This classification is based on the type of information being leaked which can be
Operation dependent, Data dependent, Address dependent or any combination of them.
New countermeasures for data dependent, data and operation dependent and addressdependent
attacks are proposed. These countermeasures are based on the fact that DPC
lends itself to randomize both the data being manipulated and the number of operations
being performed by randomizing the coordinate system used.