Lighting systems are known to be the major consumer of energy in buildings
regardless of prevailing climates. Energy efficiency in a lighting system can be achieved
mainly through the minimization of two variables: the lighting power density and the
artificial lighting use. System use can be reduced by the effective integration of daylight
with artificial lighting, because daylighting can reduce not only energy consumption but
also the lighting internal loads and thus the cooling loads.
The effective integration of the artificial lighting system with daylight occurs when
artificial lighting can be controlled as a function of daylighting levels reaching the
working surfaces. Large window areas allow more daylight into a space, but they may
also allow excessive heat gain or loss, which increases the cooling or heating load and
consequently the energy consumption. Designing a window for a space in which there is
a balance between daylight provision and solar thermal load would lead to minimum
energy consumption in the space.
The main objective of this research is to investigate the energy performance for office
buildings due to the integration of daylight and artificial lighting. A base case office
building was developed by using the common practice in the Dhahran area. The energy
simulation program VisualDOE was used to evaluate the impact of daylight integration
on office building energy performance. The results showed a reduction of about 35  of
lighting energy consumption and 13  of total energy consumption. The building cooling
load was also reduced, which resulted in a smaller air conditioning system. A parametric
analysis was conducted to find the impact of different window design parameters,
including window area, height and glazing types, on building energy performance. A
design tool in the form of a set of graphs and tables was then developed to assist in
energy efficient window design through integration of daylight and artificial lighting for
various window to wall ratios (WWRs), heights and glazing types for principal zone
orientations in office buildings.