The conventional practice of petroleum industry is to formulate oil based mud system
using No. 2 diesel as the base oil. However, their high toxicity level made them
unsustainable for using in many environmentally sensitive offshore and onshore locations
globally. The recent environmental legislation and control restriction of the usages of oilbased
mud become more stringent in many parts of the world in general, and the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia in particular. For instance, a set of regulations called the
Corporate Regulations for Offshore Drilling Operations in Saudi Arabia established by
the Royal Decree No. M/9 of November 18, 1987, stipulates that all oil based drilling
fluids that are designated as toxic fluids, and cuttings must be hauled back to an
approved onshore disposal site, and that cuttings from oil based mud should be cleaned
using the best practical technology and then be discharged as close as possible to the sea
floor. In addition, a recent study shows that the cost to haul a barrel of drilling waste is
USD 40, and cost of cleaning one pound of oil soaked cuttings is USD 25. Therefore,
implementation of these regulations will make the overall drilling cost skyrocket. As a
result synthetic solvent based mud systems are being used in the oil industry for drilling.
However, these mud systems are not only toxic, but also very expensive too. Hence, the
development of a sustainable drilling fluid from natural, biodegradable, environmentally
friendly oils which satisfies both technical and environmental criteria becomes inevitable.
This study is an account of the development of two mud systems: An oil based mud
system and a synthetic solvent based mud system. Complete mud check conducted on
them and a comparison between their properties made. Results of measured parameters
such as dial readings, plastic viscosity (PV), yield point (YP), Gel strength, high temperature and high pressure (HTHP) filtration loss, electrical stability, and base oil
ASTM specification tests show that the developed non toxic OBM meets the requirement
and compares favorably with the synthetic based mud currently being used in offshore
location in Saudi Arabian waters. This research will have a positive environmental
impact on the petroleum industry’s current practices which will eventually make a strong
position of Saudi Arabia globally. The development of an oil based mud from canola oil
had been carried out using standard additives. Canola oil was chosen for use because it is
environmentally friendly, non toxic (belonging to a group of oils collectively called
GRAS), and meets the standard specifications required of any oil to be used as a base oil
for the formulation of an oil based mud. Laboratory results indicate that canola oil can be
used as base oil for OBM formulation. Formulated canola oil based OBM also compared
favorably with a synthetic OBM system in terms of rheology, stability, quantity of
additives used, and level of toxicity. 