Priority intersections form a major element in road networks since significant
portions of traffic accidents and delays occur at them. Nevertheless, there is lack in
studies directed to evaluate the performance of these junctions and to understand driver
behavior at them. Previous research has acknowledged that priority junctions can be
studied within the context of driver gap acceptance behavior and has raised the
importance of incorporating driver, vehicle, and trip attributes in gap acceptance studies
related to these junctions. However, limited effort has been directed to this subject. The
quantitative effects of driver, vehicle, and trip attributes were not evaluated and the
reported results in literature about the effects of other typical traffic attributes are
inconsistent.
In this study Binomial Logit Behavioral Models are developed for diver gap
acceptance at priority intersections. The study has investigated the effect of the main
driver, vehicle, trip, gap, and traffic attributes on driver gap acceptance behavior at Tintersections.
Left turns form major road and right and left turns from minor road are
considered. Data needed to calibrate the models were collected using field administered
questionnaires and video cameras. More than thirty models are reported and discussed in
the study. Along with the basic traffic and delay attributes such as the gap size, the speed
of the approaching vehicle, the total delay imposed on the driver at minor road, and the
traffic volume at minor road the driver, trip, and vehicle attributes such as driver age, sex,
and accident experience, trip duration, and vehicle occupancy were found to be significant
factors in explaining driver gap acceptance behavior. The study has also concluded that
binary choice models other than the binomial Logit could provide an adequate framework
for modeling driver gap acceptance process.
The results of gap acceptance analysis are applicable to different traffic engineering
fields. As an example, the study has demonstrated the applicability of the calibrated
models to identify sight distance requirements at priority intersections.