A novel method of preparing the gas diffusion electrodes for fiiel cells is proposed which
overcomes the problems of conventional 'Dry Method'. In this method, the catalyst is
milled with a polymer binder and a slurry of the milled catalyst is made using a surfactant.
This slurry is filtered on a filter paper to give a uniform filter cake. This is rolled with a
metallic mesh which works as charge collector. The remaining traces o f the surfactant are
washed off with boiling solvent to get the final electrode.
To demonstrate, test and study the effectiveness of the method, Raney Ni catalyst and
Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) binder were used to make electrodes. These electrodes
were used as anode in an alkaline fuel cell. The performance tests of galvanostatic
polarization at 25, 45, 55, 65 and 75°C showed that the new electrodes performed better.
Five parameters which may affect the performance, namely; PTFE content, milling time,
cooling while milling, clearance between the calendars and the removal of the surfactant
were considered in the experimental design. The PTFE content, milling time, their
interaction and cooling were found significant using a partial factorial design ( 2 ^ ) . The
performance of these electrodes were best at 8  PTFE and milling for 60 seconds while
cooling was ON.
The spherical grain model for the performance was modified with the assumptions that the
electrode is made of spherical agglomerates of Raney metal and PTFE, flooded with
electrolyte, while the gas is occupying the macropores. In addition to the analysis of the
diffusion and reaction inside the grains in the spherical grain model, this model includes
the resistance of gas diffusion into the macropores and a thin electrolyte film surrounding
the grain. The original and modified models were compared with the experimental
polarization data of hydrogen oxidation on a Ni/PTFE electrode in KOH. The newly
developed model predicts the experimental data very well in all regions. This model was
used to obtain exchange current density (i0), charge transfer coefficient(a) and activation
energy (E) for the best electrode prepared by the filtration method. The values of these
parameters at 25°C were 24.0x10 mA/cm^, 0.62 and 73.9 KJ/mol respectively.