In recent years, lots of research efforts have been directed towards miniaturization
of devices and components in order to make them portable, compact, more efficient,
more sensitive and ultimately consume less power. These reasons, among others, propel
the increased research interest in nanoelectromechanical system (NEMS). The impact of
NEMS is projected to cut across all aspects of life from automotive systems and
communication to medicine and bioengineering.
A part of this dissertation focuses on the optimization of some characteristics of
ultrathin ) polycrystalline silicon germanium (polySiGe) films that are suitable
for applications as structural layers for NEMS devices including biosensors,
nanoswitches, nanoresonators, etc. Poly SiGe is selected because it can be deposited at a
lower temperature (< 450oC) by chemical vapour deposition technique compared to many
other materials. In addition, the intrinsic stresses can be favourably tuned with
germanium. For the optimization process, the grey Taguchi approach was used to deliver
an optimal combination of stress (43 MPa), resistivity (1.39 cm) and deposition rate
(0.34 nm/s) at CMOS (complementary metal oxide semiconductor) compatible deposition
temperature of 415oC, silane and germane flow rates of 8 sccm and 180 sccm,
respectively. In addition to the optimized recipe, an ‘experimental best’ recipe selected
from the Taguchi orthogonal array was further characterized. Among the additional
characteristics included those of chemical (boron concentration and germanium fraction),
electrical (carrier concentration, Hall mobility and resistivity), and mechanical (surface
roughness, elastic modulus and hardness). By using these recipes, detailed experimental
studies of evolution of stress, resistivity and surface properties were conducted to understand how the trend of the local stresses across the film thickness is influenced. It is
shown that a large variation in the local stresses is an indication of a strain gradient
expected in a free standing structure.