Deterioration and damage of reinforced concrete structures due to reinforcement corrosion is
a widely reported subject in the literature. The rate of reinforcement corrosion is one of the
essential factors required for assessing the extent of damage in a corroded reinforced concrete
member and also for predicting its residual service life. The rate of reinforcement corrosion is
generally evaluated by the linear polarization resistance technique. However, the available
commercial equipment do not predict the rate of reinforcement corrosion due to the high
resistive medium of concrete. Thus there is a need to develop a reliable setup to measure
reinforcement corrosion in concrete. The objective of this study was to develop a reliable
and simple set up and procedure for determining the rate of reinforcement corrosion utilizing
the linear polarization resistance method.
Reinforced concrete specimens 500 × 500 × 80 mm with three 12 mm diameter steel bars
were prepared. The steel bars in the concrete slabs were corroded to varying degree by the
impressed current method. Corrosion current density (Icorr) was measured using the developed
setup and two commercial equipment and the results were compared with the gravimetric
weight loss.
The corrosion current density determined using the developed setup and other two
commercial equipment without Ohmic drop compensation compared very well with the
gravimetric weight loss. However, the best trend was noted in the data obtained from the
developed setup. A good correlation was noted between the corrosion current density values
determined with the developed setup with Ohmic drop compensation and the gravimetric
weight loss. However, the correlation between the corrosion current density measured using
the commercial equipment with Ohmic drop was poor indicating that the commercial
equipment are not able to measure the corrosion rate with Ohmic drop compensation. These
results indicate the usefulness of the developed setup in both types of measurements, namely
with and without Ohmic compensation. A good correlation was noted between the moisture
content, electrical resistivity and corrosion current density.