The present work aims at a study o f Attitude tracking and control o f a rigid spacecraft
model. The plant (spacecraft model) is a sixth order nonlinear multi input multi output
system. The plant is stabilized using state feed back. The stability o f the closed loop is
assured using Routh Hurwitz criterion and a Lyapunov function. The step response o f the
closed loop is used to design two PID controllers using standard classical techniques
(Ziegler Nichols and Cohen Coon). Two adaptive control structures are proposed for the
spacecraft model such that the output o f the spacecraft model follows the desired input
(attitude trajectory). The first structure is Feed forward learning based adaptive control
structure. Attitude tracking is established using this structure by incorporating an
adaptive filter with the PID controller using normalized least mean square adaptation
algorithm. The second structure is an Internal Model Control (IMC) based adaptive
structure. The IMC structure consists o f an explicit model o f the plant along with the
feed forward PID controller. The model o f the plant is computed using normalized least
mean square adaptation algorithm. The adaptive control structures are independent o f
the plant parameters and do not require a priori knowledge o f the spacecraft inertiamatrix. The overall closed loop is such that the controllers design depends on the output
o f the plant. Computer simulation results are done to illustrate the effectiveness o f the
proposed control structures and showed good control and tracking characteristics.
Finally an experiment is performed to illustrate the idea o f attitude control in
satellites. A Cube Sat model is designed and is shown to track a light source
demonstrating the idea o f attitude tracking. The light source represents the sun’s light in
space. The objective o f this work is to detect the location o f the sun and rotate the Cube 
Sat towards the sun’s position, so that maximum solar power can be utilized. Stepper
Motor is used to drive the Cube Sat, which receives signal from a light sensing device.
The system is designed such that, when the light source moves the Cube Sat also moves
towards the light source’s direction. When the required face is positioned towards the
Sun, the supply to the motor is disconnected. The total system, including Stepper motor
that drives the Cube Sat, operates at 12V DC. For the demonstration purpose 12V DC is
derived from a power supply kit. In this project work LDR (light dependent resistor) is
used as a light sensing device. They are used for detecting the direction o f Sunlight. The
motion o f the motor is bi directional acquiring the nearest possible path to the sun. To
serve this purpose a second LDR is used which changes the direction o f the stepper
motor when it senses light. The complete setup is stand alone and the setup photos
illustrate the work carried out.