Magnetic resonance study was carried out for four vanadium model
compounds containing sulfur and nitrogen heteroatoms at 9GHz. These
systems are Bis(S methyl 3 isopropyIIidenehydrazinecarbodithioto)oxovanadium(
IV); (VI); and Bis(S methyl 3 cyclohexylidenehydrazinecarbodithioto)
oxovanadium(IV); (V2) in toluene and S mehtyl N salicylidene hydrazinecarbo 
thioatophenanthrolineoxovanadium(IV); V3; and S mehtyl N 5 
methoxysalicylidenehydrazinecarbothioatophenanthorline oxovanaium(IV);
V4; in methylene chloride.
The magnetic parameters for these systems are determined and
structural and electronic information are obtained. The obtained magnetic
parameters suggest that the structure of these systems is five coordinated
distorted square pyramidal. Also, it is found that for VO(N2S2) systems are
characterized by a more in plane c bonding compared to VO(N3S) systems.
Also, it is found that for VO(N3S) systems the unpaired electron is more
localized on vanadium compared to VO(N2S2) systems. Also, we found a
good correlation between gn and Ay values for varying complexes with equatorial liquids of the type VO(N4), VO(N3S), VO(N2S2) and VO(S4).
This will be useful in characterization of the non porphyrin species of
vanadium in asphaltenes.
The hydrodynamic radii of these systems , which are essential to the
anisotropic interaction analysis, are obtained from the translational diffusion
experiment to be 5.39, 5.70, 7.12 and 7.67 A0 for VI and V2 in toluene and
V3 and V4 in methylene chloride respectively.
The variable temperature spectra were recorded and analyzed in both
the motional narrowing and the slow motion regions. The anisotropy of
rotation (N) and the correlation times, xR were obtained from this motional
analysis. The fast motion limit analysis suggest that the four systems
studied were undergoing axially symmetric rotational diffusion at y axis
with N = 2.5, 1.7, 1.5 and 1.7 ± 0.4 for VI, V2, V3 and 4 respectively. The
spectra in the slow tumbling region were successfully simulated using the
Brownian model. This is important for the calculation of the hydrodynamic
molecular radius, r0, based on the stick model.
Molecular reorientation for these systems were analyzed in terms of
the hydrodynamic free space model for molecular relaxation in liquids. The
motional analysis indicate that the solute solvent interactions and r0 are
constant in the temperature range studied. The stickiness factor is found to
be 0.461, 0.636, 0.365 and 0.160 for VI, and V2 in toluene, and V3 and V4
in methylene chloride respectively. We found that quite remarkably that S
approaches unity even on the molecular level. In conclusion, rough solute
spheres exert torques more efficiently than elongated solutes, and the
solutes exert torques more efficiently when the solvent used is more
anisotropic