Since nowadays polymers are being used increasingly for load bearing industrial
applications, understanding the fatigue process in these materials is very necessary and
essential. For application o f linear elastic fracture mechanics (LEFM) to polymers, it is
necessary to recognize potential pitfalls caused by their viscoelastic behavior, i.e. stressstrain
dependence on time (or frequency) and temperature. Due to their viscoelastic
nature, the fatigue crack propagation (FCP) behavior o f most polymers is sensitive to test
variables such as cyclic frequency and temperature. In this study, Fatigue crack
propagation in Cholorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) pipefittings and high density
polyethylene (HDPE) pipes are investigated over the frequency and temperature ranges
o f O.l lOHz and  10 70°C, respectively. Monotonic tests are also performed on both
materials for different temperatures, and their result shows decrease in yield stress with
increase in temperature.
FCP tests were conducted on single edged notched specimens (SEN), prepared
from CPVC pipefittings and HDPE pipes. A servo controlled electro hydraulic materials
testing system was used for the fatigue testing. Crack growth was monitored optically by
using the long distance traveling microscope with video camera system. The crack
growth rate (da/dN) and stress intensity factor (AK) gave satisfactory correlation at all
temperatures and frequencies. The fatigue crack growth resistance was found to increase
with increasing frequency, and decrease with increasing temperature. Crazing was found
to be the dominant fatigue mechanism, especially at (50° C and 70° C), while shear
yielding was the dominant mechanism at ( 10°, 0° and 23° C). The da/dN AK master
curves for CPVC and HDPE were developed for different frequencies based on the
modified mechanical properties at different temperatures. Microscopic examination o f the
fracture surfaces is also performed. Comparison o f the fatigue surfaces obtained at
different temperatures and frequencies gives useful information on the fatigue fracture
mechanisms operative at these temperatures and frequencies.