WC Co hard metal composites are widely used in cutting and drilling industry, due to
their unique combination of properties such as wear , high thermal shock ; corrosionresistant
and exhibiting high hardness and toughness values.
Nano sized WC powder was prepared through planetary ball milling of as received
micron sized WC powder for 72hrs. These hard carbides were further mixed with soft
binding material, Cobalt in this case, and other desired additives through mechanical
alloying, which results in homogeneous distribution of powders in the mixed
composition. The resulted mixed powder composition was then consolidated under spark
plasma sintering technique. Sintering and compositional parameters were varied during
this study. The resulted sintered composites were characterized for their densification,
Vickers hardness and fracture toughness. Micro structural characterization was done
through FESEM and X rays diffraction.
One of the key challenges for researchers in this area is the development of WC Co Nano
composites by limiting their grain sizes to nanoscale, even after sintering. The
development of finer dense microstructures is in addition to the expectations of
improving their mechanical properties. The aim of this study is to offer an understanding
to the possible fabrication of dense nanostructured hard metals composites and further
effect on mechanical properties of these nanocomposites, by varying initial WC particle
sizes and use of grain growth inhibitors, in retarding grain growth. The effect of grain
growth was also studied in combination of changing amount of binding material and
sintering temperature. Vanadium carbide and Chromium carbide as grain growth
inhibitors have been studied in ranges of 0.2, 0.4, 0.6 and 0.8wgt , both individually and
also in combination. In addition to individual and combined effect of these inhibitors,
their effect was also monitored while varying amount cobalt and sintering temperature of
these spark plasma sintered nano crystalline WC(10nm) Co cemented carbides, in each
case. Grain sizes attained in each case and their respective mechanical and physical
properties were analyzed and compared respectively. Characterization was carried out
using (XRD)X ray diffraction, (FESEM)Field emission scanning electron microscope.
Densification, hardness and fracture toughness were observed, measured and compared in
each case to access any improvement in the mechanical properties.
It was found that VC added samples were comparatively more active in controlling grain
sizes, however resulted in comparatively lower densification of the resulted nano
composite. Beside Cr3C2 added samples were found to result in comparatively higher
hardness and fracture toughness of the material. Further combination of both inhibitors
in a particular sample, rather than individual, was found to result with higher mechanical
properties.