Benzene, Toluene and Xylene (BTX) compounds are the main constituents o f gasoline
and their presence in groundwater is common because o f hydrocarbon spill and leakage o f
storage tanks. These compounds are relatively highly soluble and mobile in the subsurface
and are toxic even at very low concentrations. Bioremediation is the most widely used
technique among all the currently employed methods for treating BTX contaminated soil
and groundwater. Various factors affecting bioremediation, such as dissolved oxygen,
nutrient, temperature, pH, etc. have been well studied in the laboratory soil columns and
microcosms. The effect o f soil permeability (as groundwater velocity) has been
investigated in this study using a pilot scale sand tank model. The effect o f dissolved
oxygen (DO) and contaminant concentration are also included in the study. Numerical
models have been developed using finite difference and orthogonal collocation to simulate
one dimensional transport with time dependent pore water velocity. The modeling process
includes sorption given by linear isotherm and biodegradation given by a variety o f
kinetics such as first order, zero order, Monod, Michalis Menten, Haldane and many other
inhibitory and non inhibitory kinetics. A variety o f initial and boundary conditions such as
Dirichlet's, Neuman's, mixed, decaying, etc. have been modeled. Three models (first order
and/or zero order, non growth associated Monod, and Monod) have been inverted using a
Gauss Marquardt Levenberg algorithm to assess the transport parameter, such as
retardation constant (R), first order rate constant (p.) and zero order rate constant (y). A
3(22) factorial experiment has been conducted to study three factors, groundwater
velocity, BTX concentration and dissolved oxygen (DO). Observed concentration data
collected from the sand tank model have been used for estimating the transport
parameters. The data has been found to fit well to first order/zero order as well as to
Monod model. Groundwater velocity has been found to be the most significant factor
governing the rate o f biodegradation (determined from the first order rate constant) o f
BTX compounds. Dissolved oxygen and BTX concentration have also been found to be
significant factors.