Calcareous sediments are commonly used, in the eastern region o f Saudi Arabia, as base
and subbase material for roads and runways. The construction materials are produced from
crushers in which materials with different qualities and particle sizes are mixed together and
the final product is intended to have a certain gradation. The produced materials have acute
water sensitivity. In addition to the upnormal behavior o f the calcareous base course materials
under the prevailing environmental and loading conditions, the adequacy o f use o f
conventional testing procedures for strength determination o f these materials is questionable.
This is caused by the poor correlation between the laboratory and the field results, as a result
o f discarding the oversize particles for the laboratory’ samples.
In this research program, the effect o f gradation and testing procedures on the load
canying capacity o f calcareous sediments (marls) was studied. This was achieved by
performing a testing program using the CBR. Unconfined Compressive Strength and Clegg
Hammer tests. Three different gradations for tw'o different marls were used in the study. In
addition, a large size compaction and CBR testing setup was used to study the effect o f
oversize particles on the CBR and CIV values. Furthermore, the applicability o f the common
oversize correction methods was investigated.
The results clearly showed that soil gradation has a Temarkable effect on the UCS values
while its effect on the CBR and CIV results was not that significant. In addition, the maximum
panicle size, which was included in the specimens, was found to have great significance on
the CBR values. Furthermore, the maximum dry density and the optimum moisture content
values were found to be independent o f soil gradation. The mold confinement was found to
have a significant effect on the CBR values. About 100  increase occurred on the CBR values
as a result o f mold confinement. In addition, CBR values greater than 200  w'ere found to
have questionable practicality.
After implementing the oversize correction methods for the selected marls, it was
observed that all equations approximated the dry' density o f the entire material and produced
density values close to those obtained using the large mold, w'ith less than 2  tolerances.
However, the AASHTO 1 and ASTM correction equations gave underestimated and
overestimated values, respectively. While AASHTO 2 equation and scalp and replace methods
gave accurate results.