Poly (ethylene terephthalate) is a semi crystalline polymer, which has applications in
both semi crystalline and amorphous forms. It is being used extensively in preparing
molded products. Different processing parameters like pressure and temperature directly
affect the degree o f crystallinity and the microstructure developed during molding. These
parameters in turn affect the performance o f the end product.
In this research work, effect of mold temperature on microhardness and tensile
properties o f PET, in the temperature range o f 130°C to 204°C, was determined. This
range was selected based on crystal growth studies and the time required for complete
crystallization at different crystallization temperatures. It was found that mold
temperature has appreciable effect on microhardness and tensile properties.
Microhardness increases linearly with mold temperature. This increase was attributed to
the increase in crystallinity o f samples and also to the development o f thicker and more
stable lamellar structure. It was found that most o f the tensile properties correlate well
with mold temperature. Tensile elastic modulus (ET) and Yield strain (sy) increase with
mold temperature, Yield stress ( a y) tends to stabilize at 160°C and then increases. Strain
at break ( 8b ) decreases linearly with mold temperature, whereas, Stress at break ( Ob )
remained constant at a value of 45 MPa within the mold temperature range of 130°C to
204°C. In general, most o f the properties were found to correlate well with the
crystallinity o f the samples, suggesting that crystallinity is one o f the main factors
influencing the mechanical behavior o f PET, other factors being crystal size and crystal
thickness. Microhardness o f the PET at different mold temperatures was correlated with
tensile properties. Linear correlations between microhardness and tensile properties were
obtained. These correlations are expected to help the PET industry, where they can be
used to estimate the mechanical properties by simply measuring the hardness o f the
product.