With the continued growth of petroleum demand, the oil and gas companies are searching
in new or unexplored areas. The search is getting extreme in terms of depth, temperature
and pressure. In deeper wells, high temperature and pressure and post cementing
operations put extreme stresses on the cement sheath and affect the integrity of the
cement. In such conditions, the design of cement slurry is very critical and it must
possess properties which ensure the durability and long term integrity of cement sheath.
To resolve this problem, many additives are being investigated and used in high pressure
and temperature wells.
Recently, Nano Materials have demonstrated effectiveness across a wide variety of
industries, from textiles and defense to aerospace and energy. They are now being used as
commercially worthwhile solutions to technical challenges faced many industries. Having
high surface area and small size, attracts them to petroleum industry. Their application in
petroleum industry is progressing in a last few years.
The objective of this study is to evaluate the physical properties of Saudi cement class G
with Nano clay addition and admixed with different additives such as fluid loss agent,
retarder, expanding agent and friction reducing agent under high temperature and
pressure conditions. Nano clay is added at different percentages to the cement slurry
xx
mixture currently used for oil/gas well cementing in Saudi Arabia. Experimental
investigations addresses different cement slurry properties such as thickening time, free
water separation, rheological properties, compressive strength, density, porosity,
permeability, and SEM and XRD analysis.
The best slurry design is selected on the basis of results of different percentages of Nano
clay used in experiments. From the laboratory tests, it is investigated that addition of
Nano clay improves the rheological and mechanical properties, reduces the free water
contents, retards the thickening time, reduces the density, makes the strong microstructure
of cement and helps in designing the new cement system which sustains the
high pressure and temperature conditions and gives good results. This new cement design
can be prepared and implemented in the field without adverse effects.