The inadequacy of metals and alloys in providing both strength and stiffness to a
structure has led to the development of metal matrix composites (MMCs) where rigid
ceramic reinforcements are embedded in ductile metal or alloy matrix. MMCs combine
metallic properties i.e. ductility and toughness with ceramic characteristics i.e. high
strength and modulus. These composites are extensively used in automobile and
aerospace applications because of their attractive physical and mechanical properties.
Further improvement of the properties of MMCs was possible using nano size
reinforcement and/or matrix; this led to the development of metal matrix nanocomposites
(MMNCs). However, there are challenges associated with processing nanocomposites
with the desired properties. These challenges include uniform distribution/dispersion of
the nano size reinforcement and grain growth of the matrix phase. Ball milling (BM), a
powder metallurgy processing technique, which involves cold welding, fracturing and
rewelding of powder particles, is being used to achieve a uniform distribution of the
nanoreinforcement phase. Also, spark plasma sintering (SPS), a binder less process,
which does not require a pre compaction step, has been shown to be effective nonexviii
conventional sintering method for obtaining fully dense materials with preserved
nanostructure. Although, few published works reported the synthesis of Al SiC
nanocomposites using BM and SPS, the process was not fully investigated and effect of
all critical sintering parameters i.e. compaction pressure, heating rate, sintering
temperature, and sintering time on Al SiC nanocomposites properties was not fully
analysed. Hence, the main objective of this research work is to study the effect of BM
and SPS process parameters on the microstructure and properties of Al SiC metal matrix
nanocomposites. Aluminium based nanocomposites containing 1, 5 and 10 wt  SiC were
mechanically milled between 0 and 28 hours. Milling for 24 hours led to crystallite size
reduction of the aluminium phase and homogeneous dispersion of the SiC
nanoreinforcement which was maintained even after sintering. Spark plasma sintering
experiments were carried out on the milled powders at a pressure from 20 to 50 MPa, and
heating rate from 100 to 3000C/min. Maximum density and hardness were obtained at 50
MPa and 2000C/min. These values were kept constant while temperature was varied from
500 to 6000C and holding time from 5 to 15 min in the second phase of experiments
where a sintering temperature of 6000C and a sintering time of 10 min. led to better
densification and improved properties. A unique needle like structure that resulted in high
strength was observed for composites sintered at 50 MPa and 10 min. Compression tests
were carried on samples, which showed good combination between densification and
properties, at compression rate of 1mm/min. Al  10 wt  SiC had the highest strength
with a 200  increase above base material.