Traffic accidents at urban intersections constitute about 50 percent of
all urban accidents. There are only a few research studies about the signal
coordination on intersection safety. The main purpose of this research is to
study the effect of signal coordination on intersection safety and to develop
a methodology by which intersection safety could be optimized besides other
measures of effectiveness (stops and delays).
It was hypothesized that signal coordination mainly affects stops and
that stops are mainly related to rear end accidents. An experiment was
designed and data were collected to establish the relationship between stops
and rear accidents using the Traffic Conflict Techniques (TCT). It was
shown that there is a significant relationship between rear end conflicts and
a significant relationship between rear end conflicts and rear end accidents.
Using these relationships, the direct relationship between stops and rear end
accidents was obtained and used thereafter in the remaining parts of the
research.
A signal simulation and optimization model (TRANSYT) was selected
and calibrated for the study area so that it simulated the observed number
of stops in the field. The cost functions of the optimization model were
revised for Saudi Arabian conditions and the costs of rear end accidents
were added as functions of stops and delays. Delays were calculated based
on the cost of delay and cost of stops. Furthermore, K values that optimize
safety as well as other costs were calculated.
“ X  
R e p r o d u c e d with p erm is s io n of th e copyright ow ner. F u rth e r rep ro d u ctio n prohibited w ithout p erm issio n .
Using the calibrated program and the calculated K values, several
investigations were carried out. It was shown that signal coordination may
reduce rear end accidents and operational costs up to 30 percent. Different
signal phasing schemes were investigated for different combinations of
volumes and intersection spacings and it seems that four phase schemes are
generally better than five phase schemes in similar conditions of the study
area. It was also shown that shorter than optimum cycle lengths may cause
sharp increases in stops, delays, rear end accidents and operational costs;
compared to longer than optimum cycle lengths. Therefore, it is
recommended that shorter than optimum cycle lengths be avoided.
Finally practical implications and some recommendations for further
research were given.