This study was conducted to investigate the effect of relatively high temperatures
(25 to 70 °C) and chloride and sulfate contamination on the reinforcement corrosion in
ordinary portland cement (OPC) and blended cement concretes. To achieve the
objectives of this research study, more than 500 concrete specimens were cast and
tested. The effect of temperature and chloride and sulfate contamination on the
compressive strength, porosity, electrical resistivity, alkalinity, water soluble chloride
and sulfate concentration, and corrosion of reinforcing steel was evaluated.
Results indicated that both the temperature and chloride sulfate contamination
influence the compressive strength of OPC and blended cement concrete specimens.
The compressive strength in OPC and blended cement concrete specimens was
observed to decrease with increasing exposure temperature. Addition of chloride and
chloride plus sulfate ions resulted in a decrease in the strength of OPC specimens,
while an increase in the strength of the blended cement concrete specimens was
indicated due to the addition of these salts. The cumulative pore volume in the OPC
paste specimens was observed to increase with increasing exposure temperature. This
trend was also observed in blended cements.
The C l'/O H ' ratio was also observed to increase with the exposure temperature.
The effect of temperature on C l'/O H " ratio was more pronounced for exposure
temperatures of more than 40 °C.
The reinforcement corrosion activity, as measured by the corrosion current density
on steel, in both the OPC and blended cement concrete specimens was observed to be
higher in specimens contaminated with both chloride and sulfate salts as against those
contaminated with only chloride salts. This indicates that the presence of both chloride
and sulfate ions increases the rate of corrosion. At 70 °C exposure temperature, and
chloride sulfate contamination, the performance of all the blended cements investigated,
except ASTM C 618 Class C fly ash, was not better than that of plain cements. This
indicates that the technological benefit of using supplementary cementing materials like
fly ash, silica fume and blast furnace slag can be utilized only when the chloride and/or
sulfate contamination contributed by the mix constituents are minimized.