The phasor measurement unit (PMU), using synchronization signals from the satellite global
positioning system, is considered to be a key measuring device in the future of power systems.
A PMU is characterized with its unique ability to provide synchronized phasor measurements
of voltages and currents from widely separated locations in an electric power network. PMUs
have recently evolved into mature tools and can now be deployed in a variety of power system
applications including the field of fault location.
Although PMUs have the potential to revolutionize the way electric power systems are
monitored and controlled, their installation shall be optimized due to cost factor. This thesis
addresses the two main issues in any PMU initiative, namely PMU placement and intended
system application. A new formulation for the optimal PMU placement (OPP) problem is
proposed considering not only the new PMUs to be installed but also the existing ones to be
retained or relocated. This formulation takes into account various practical constraints and
limitations such as achievement of full network observability, the list of system buses at which
PMUs must be installed and the list of system buses at which PMU installation shall be
avoided. An optimization technique based on differential evolution algorithm (DEA) is
proposed and coded in MATLAB for solving OPP problem. To benchmark the proposed DEA,
its optimal solutions are compared to the published solutions obtained using other
optimization techniques for different IEEE test systems.
Realizing the importance of accurate and swift fault location on a power network, this thesis
also proposes new PMU based adaptive fault location algorithms for two terminal , threeterminal 
and series compensted transmission networks. To improve the fault location
accuracy, the proposed algorithms utilize only PMU synchronized measurements and do not
require any data to be provided by the electric utility. In these algorithms, the transmission
line parameters and Thevenin’s equivalent of the system at designated terminals are
determined online to reflect the actual operating conditions of the system. Fault location
accuracy evaluation of the proposed algorithms is performed considering various factors such
as fault position, fault type, fault resistance, fault inception angle, pre fault loading and line
compensation degree. The proposed algorithms have been simulated using both
PSCAD/EMTDC and MATLAB and practically implemented using RTDS simulator. A real life
system is used to test the proposed algorithms for OPP problem and PMU based adaptive
fault location. Simulation results revealed that the developed algorithms produce reliable and
high quality solutions.