The effects of surface radiation on convective heat transfer to a transparent gas
flowing inside channels with non isothermal boundary conditions are investigated
numerically. The introduction of radiative heat transfer, between axial locations on
the duct walls and the inlet and exit areas, leads to a set of nonlinear integrodifferential
equations. These equations replace the standard energy constraints
boundary conditions on the convective field equations. A mathematical model has
been developed to describe the flow and heat transfer in the entry region of the
channels. This model has been derived and formulated in a general manner to describe
forced, mixed and free convection between two parallel plates and in concentric
annuli. An iterative marching technique is developed to solve numerically the
resulting group of partial and integro differential equations.
The obtained numerical solutions have been compared with their
corresponding available experimental, numerical and analytical solutions (if any).
These comparisons provided a mean of validation of the present scheme and its
method of solution.
The effect of surface radiation on the developing laminar forced convection
flow between two plates is investigated. The effect of the controlling parameters on
wall temperatures, fluid temperature profiles, and Nusslet number are illustrated. The
values of the radiation number at which surface radiation can engender symmetric
heating (and hence maximum average Nusslet number on the heated wall and
maximum reduction in the maximum heated wall temperature are achieved) are
obtained.
The effects of surface radiation on the developing laminar forced convection
flow in concentric annuli are numerically investigated. To conduct this investigation,
four shape factors not available in the literature have been derived and validated. The
effects of the controlling parameters on wall temperature and Nusslet number are
illustrated.
The effects of surface radiation on the developing laminar mixed convection
flow between two vertical parallel plates are numerically investigated. The effect of
the surface radiation on wall temperatures, fluid temperature profiles, location of the
channel height at which the buoyancy forces balance the viscous forces, the location
of the onset of pressure build up, the location of the onset of flow reversal, average
friction factor, and Nusslet number are illustrated. The values of the emissivity at
which surface radiation engenders minimum pumping power requirements are
obtained.
The effects of surface radiation on the developing laminar mixed convection
flow in vertical concentric annuli are numerically investigated. The results reveal the
significant effect of surface radiation on the velocity profiles, fluid pressure, friction
factor, temperature profiles, walls temperatures, and Nusslet number.
The radiation effect on the developing laminar natural convection flow
between two parallel plates and in a vertical concentric annulus is numerically
investigated. It was found that the maximum wall temperature decreases with the
presence of surface radiation.