The traditional method of forecasting mode choice relies heavily on
travel time and travel cost to explain traveller’s behavior. Although, these
two variables are important in mode choice, they may be inadequate in
representing people’s behavior. Transportation planners may need to
consider people’s perceptions of travel mode in mode choice models to be
able to produce reasonable forecasts. The primary objective of this research
is to investigate the effect of incorporating mode perceptions into the
modelling of mode choice process for intercity travel in Saudi Arabia. To
achieve this objective first scales were developed and tested for the purpose
of quantifying the perceptions of mode privacy, convenience, comfort and
reliability using factor analysis through a pilot survey.
For the purpose of testing the effects of mode perceptions,
multinomial logit mode choice models were calibrated for business trips as
well as social/recreational trips. The data required for calibrating the
models was obtained through a survey of all major intercity corridors in the
Kingdom considering air, bus and private auto modes. The perceptual
scales were confirmed by subjecting the main survey data to factor analysis.
The calibration process involved two stages. First, mode choice models
were calibrated, excluding the perceptual variables and next, perceptual
variables were incorporated into the previously developed models to study
their effect.
xi
R ep rod uced with p erm ission of the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited w ithout perm ission.
Among the four perceptual concepts used in the study, the perception
of mode comfort was found to significantly affect the choice of the travellers
for business as well as social/recreational trips. Perception of mode
convenience was significant for business trips only.
It was concluded from the study that the inclusion of these variables
resulted in a statistically significant but marginal improvement in the
explanation of the mode choice behavior. Because of the difficulty and cost
in obtaining the mode perceptions, it is therefore, recommended not to
included these variables in planning stages. However, they could be quite
useful in identifying deficiencies of the intercity modes as perceived by
travelers and therefore could help operators in improving their services.