Accurate determination of abandonment pressure, ultimate recovery factor, and the time to
reach abandonment condition is very important to the upstream natural gas industry. For a
given reservoir fluid, it is important to determine whether or not the abandonment pressure,
ultimate recovery factor, and the time to reach abandonment condition depend on well
type, drainage area size and shape, and reservoir rock properties such as horizontal
permeability, vertical permeability, and formation thickness. Prior to this current research,
it was commonly believed that the ultimate recovery factor at abandonment condition for
these reservoirs should be very high. This research studied the effects of well parameters
and reservoir properties on the performance of vertical wells, horizontal wells, and
hydraulically fractured vertical wells in homogeneous and anisotropic volumetric dry gas
and wet gas reservoirs. The effects of well parameters and reservoir properties on the
abandonment pressure, the ultimate recovery factor, and the time to reach abandonment
condition were investigated. The well parameters and reservoir properties that were
investigated include horizontal permeability, formation thickness, vertical permeability,
horizontal well penetration ratio, vertical to horizontal permeability ratio, horizontal well
location with respect to the upper and lower no flow boundaries, hydraulic fracture
penetration ratio, hydraulic fracture conductivity, drainage area size and shape, gas gravity,
and porosity. For each case, the average reservoir pressure at the time of abandonment and
xxvi
the time to reach abandonment were determined by a minimum production rate below
which it will not be economical to produce from the well. Performance of the horizontal
well was compared with the performance of the un stimulated vertical well and with the
hydraulically fractured vertical well. Guideline for the selection of the proper well type in
a given reservoir is presented. The results and conclusions presented in this research have
not been introduced into the petroleum engineering literature previously.
Results indicate that horizontal permeability, formation thickness, well penetration ratio,
drainage area size and shape, have significant effect on the performance of these three well
types while gas gravity has negligible effect. The ratio of vertical permeability to
horizontal permeability and the location of the horizontal well with respect to the upper and
lower no flow boundaries have negligible effect on the performance of horizontal wells in
dry gas and wet gas reservoirs. The value of porosity does not affect the ultimate recovery
factor and the abandonment pressure but it affects the abandonment time.
At low horizontal permeabilities, hydraulic fracture length has significant effect on the well
performance while hydraulic fracture conductivity has no effect. As permeability increases
to 1 md, both the hydraulic fracture length and conductivity affect the well performance.
In general, at horizontal permeabilities of 1 md and lower, a hydraulic fracture of
penetration ratio 0.2 performs almost the same as a horizontal well of penetration ratio 0.4.
At high permeabilities, horizontal and vertical wells have the same ultimate recovery factor
and abandonment pressure; however, horizontal wells perform better than vertical wells in
terms of the abandonment time.