Classification in the emerging field of Bioinformatics is a challenging task because
the information about different diseases is either insufficient or lacking in authenticity as
data is collected from different types of medical equipment. Also the limitation of human
expertise in manual diagnoses leads to incorrect diagnoses. Moreover, the information
gathered from various sources is subject to imprecision and uncertainty. Researchers
utilized Artificial Neural Networks, Support Vector Machine and Bayesian Networks to
achieve better classification, but the developed models are bedeviled by several
limitations especially in uncertain situations. Recently, Type 1 and Type 2 Fuzzy Logic
Systems (FLS) have been introduced as novel computational intelligence approaches for
both prediction and classification. However Type 2 and other FLS have not been fully
utilized in the bioinformatics and medical science. This thesis presents a Type 2 FLSbased
classification framework for multivariate data to diagnose different types of
diseases, which is capable of handling imprecision and uncertainty. As expected, this new
computational intelligence approach overcomes the weaknesses of existing classifiers,
particularly in the ability to handle data in uncertain situations such as uncertainty due to
the existence of various types of noise, inconsistent expert opinions, ignorance and
laziness. The classification accuracy and performance of the proposed framework are
measured by using University of California, Irvine (UCI) well known medical datasets.
The classification is performed on the basis of the nature of the inputs (e.g., singleton or
non singleton) and on whether uncertainty is present or absent. Empirical results have
shown that the proposed FLS classification framework outperforms earlier implemented
models with better classification accuracy among all existing classifiers. In addition, we
conducted empirical studies on this classifier regarding the impact of various parameters
of the proposed framework such as training algorithms and defuzzification methods.