Presence of high concentrations of inorganic pollutants in phenolic wastewater effluents from refinery
and petrochemical industries renders improper discharge of such wastewaters liable to leading to
detrimental environmental consequences and also posing greater challenge for effective phenol
oxidation and overall decontamination process. This dissertation thoroughly addressed such issues
considering electrochemical oxidation of phenol in simulated petrochemical wastewaters containing
NH4
+, CN  and S2  in different single, binary, ternary and quaternary mix matrixes using Boron Doped
Diamond (BDD) anodes.
Statistical experimental design was employed to model and optimize the experimental operating
conditions through Response Surface Methodology (RSM) modeling technique. Phenol, TOC and
COD decay profiles excellently fitted experimentally verified second order quadratic models having
all investigated influencing parameters statistically significant. The overall decontamination process
was mainly kinetically controlled process dominated by heterogeneous and irreversible direct
oxidation reactions on the BDD anode surface mainly mediated by electro generated OH with mass
transfer effects as the rate limiting step. At pH < pKa of phenol, oxidation of phenol was effectively
achieved regardless of phenol initial concentration, while at pH > the pKa and low phenol
concentration, accumulation of intermediary byproducts and polymerization hindered phenol
oxidation.
Erroneous predictions of phenol oxidation kinetics from existing COD evolution based models due to
presence of the inorganic species were corrected with modified models based on TOC decay data.
With the exception of NH4
+ ions, the degradation kinetics for phenol as well as the inorganic species
in the different mix matrixes were consistently pseudo first order kinetics with the kinetic and
hydrodynamic constants for phenol, TOC and COD been reduced mainly as result of decline in the
BDD anodes’ activities. Comprehensive analyses of oxidation byproducts suggested that the
mechanism for phenol oxidation was primarily initiated by speciation of the phenol molecules that led
to the generation of aromatic intermediates via hydroxylation which were further oxidized and
converted to short chain aliphatic acids before finally converting to CO2. Presence of the inorganic
species didn’t hamper the phenol oxidation ability of the BDD anode, though reaching steady state of
complete decontamination was significantly delayed according to the inorganic species presence in
solution.