Electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide (ERC) is an elegant method to abate global
warming by chemically fixing a major green house gas (GHG), carbon dioxide (CO2).
Major synthesis products include economically attractive chemicals like methanol, formic
acid methane and ethylene etc. Various aspects of ERC, like thermodynamics, kinetics
and mechanism (s), have been extensively studied in past two decades in both aqoues and
non aqueous medium. The process requires an efficient catalyst and energy because very
CO2 being a very stable molecule and its slow electroreduction kinetics. Moreover,
reduction products strongly depend on electro catalyst and electrical potentials used. In
both aqueous and non aqueous environments, even at higher over potentials, the yield and
selectivity towards desired products is still relatively low. The major bottle neck is
believed to be the low solubility of carbon dioxide in electrolyte and slow kinetics
leading to low current density and high overpotential at which this reaction proceeds.
Moreover, typically, ERC proceeds concomitantly with hydrogen evolution which, in
turn, further limits the overall efficiency of the process.
Focus of this work was on the development of nano electrocatalysts and a gas phase
reactor system for ERC. In this work, in the first part copper, ruthenium, palladium and
xx
iron supported on carbon nanotubes (CNTs) were synthesized by incipient impregnation
and deposition precipitation method. The synthesized catalysts were characterized for
their morphology and structure by XRD, SEM, TEM, BET and XPS. The results shows
that the above mentioned metals in the nano scale were successfully mounted on the
support. These catalysts were tested in a half cell to quick evaluation of their
electrocatalytic activity and then membrane electrode assembly (MEA) was made using
the optimum catalyst to further test their activity in a continuous solid polymer electrolyte
(SPE) reactor.
The second part involved the synthesis of titanium oxide nanotubes (TNTs) and its
utilization as catalyst support. Copper, ruthenium, palladium and iron supported on TNT
catalysts were prepared. These catalysts were characterized for their morphology and
structure. Electro catalytic activities are evaluated in a half cell as well as in H type
Pyrex cell by linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) and chronoamperometry methods (CA).
The products were analyzed by gas chromatography equipped with flame ionization
detector (FID) and thermal conductivity detector (TCD). Then the optimum catalyst was
used to prepare MEA using nafion as proton conducting membrane to test the optimum
catalyst in a continuous SPE reactor under varied process parameters. Methanol,
methane, and ethylene were detected as major products.