The problems of global warming and air pollution have led to enforcement of stringent
constraints by governments and international community on the release of emissions.
These constraints are nowadays among the most important factors impacting plant
operations. Inferential sensing techniques have been gaining momentum recently as
viable alternatives to hardware sensors (i.e. Continuous Emission Monitoring System) in
various situations. The core of inferential sensing is built on modeling and estimation
techniques.
This thesis work investigated and developed an inferential sensing technique for process
emission monitoring using artificial neural networks. Neural Networks are powerful tool
for modeling highly complex non linear systems, especially when the physics of the
systems is not clearly understood or difficult to determine as with emission from
processes. Three different neural networks techniques were employed to model emission
xii
R ep rod uced with perm ission o f the copyright ow ner. Further reproduction prohibited without perm ission.
from the furnace unit of an industrial boiler. Multilayer Perceptron Neural Network was
first investigated to construct the desired model; a trade off was struck between the
accuracy and the computational complexity of the model. Due to the drawbacks of
multilayer perceptron neural network in getting trapped in local solution and it
sensitivities to initial value of weights and biases other approaches were investigated.
Two models were developed with two different sets of data using Radial Basis Function
Network so that adequate and parsimonious model can be obtained with no local
minimum problem. While a third technique was improvised to seize the merits of Neural
Networks and Particle Swarm Optimization to deal with approximation embedded in the
estimation of the derivative in the multilayer perceptron thereby leading to a more
accurate model. On a final note, real plant’s data were archived from an industrial
process that produces ample amount of emission; the data were used to develop a model
for the process using the modeling techniques highlighted above. The results obtained
clearly shows the ability of neural network techniques in developing process emission
model.