Polypyrrole (PPy) can be synthesized by either chemical or electrochemical methods.
Electrochemical methods (electropolymerization) usually give higher PPy conductivity
than the chemical methods. However, the electropolymerization of pyrrole on oxidizable
metals such as mild steel is difficult because the metallic electrode undergoes strong
dissolution before oxidation potential o f the monomer (pyrrole) is reached. Recently, a
few electrochemical methods have been proposed to polymerize pyrrole on various steel
substrate successfully. In this work, these methods are evaluated to select the best one,
from the corrosion protection point o f view. Subsequently, a parametric study was
undertaken on the selected method to study the effect o f electropolymerization
parameters namely; applied current density, electrolyte pH and temperature.
Among the tested methods, a method that uses oxalic acid as electrolyte showed the most
adherent deposition o f polypyrrole on mild steel. The parametric study on this method
shows that increasing the current density can enhance the deposition but the surface
becomes rough. The time needed for passivating the steel surface (induction time)
decreases with increased applied current density while the electropolymerization
potential increases with current density.
The induction time increases as the pH increases up to 7.0 while it is minimum at pH 8.5.
The electropolymerization potential for the neutral or alkaline solution is much higher
than that for acidic solution. The temperature has negative effects on the deposition in
both acidic and neutral medium. On the other hand, it has positive effects on the
deposition for the alkaline solution. The induction time does not change much as the
temperature elevates except at neutral solution in which the induction time is increasing
with temperature.
Oscillation in potential were observed at temperature higher than 25 °C in acidic media.
Occurance and nature o f the oscillation depend on current density, pH and temperature.
This phenomenon is explained by two reactions cometing each other, namely, corrosion
reaction and the oxidation reaction for formation o f polypyrrole. Apparently, corrosion
reaction dominates at high temperature for acidic and neutral solution while the
deposition reaction is favored as the temperature increases for alkaline solution.