The noble Quran takes care of addressing and talking about the
emotions of human beings, which form a fundamental part of their entity and
have a profound impact on their lives; they (their emotions) can even
completely control them unless they are governed by the Sharia.
The word ‘emotion’ does not explicitly occur in the noble Quran.
Nevertheless, other meanings that denote the emotional aspect, such as love,
hatred, fear, and awe, are mentioned therein. The Quran also includes the
words ‘soul’ and ‘heart’, the two receptacles that contain the emotions in all
their different forms. Indeed, emotions lie within a person’s heart and deeply
affect his attitude.
Linguistically, an emotion is a feeling of pain or joy that settles within a
soul regarding a certain thing, and this happens through seeing, hearing, or
thinking. In this respect, the Quran refers to it in the form of emotions felt by
parents towards their children, by the prophets towards their followers, by a
husband towards his wife, by brothers towards one another, and so on. The
Book of Allah uses a variety of methods in order to present the emotions that
a person feels towards his family and relatives. To this end, it sometimes
resorts to storytelling, direct instruction (commands and prohibitions), or the
enactment of some rulings related to Fiqh. Based on this, a group of emotional,
social, and behavioral values which have a profound effect on the lives of
individuals and society were derived. In fact, values build the balanced
character of a Muslim, strengthen his will, and refine his manners while they
also keep society safe and undermine evil.
The study relies on the descriptive and analytical approach to realize
the Quran’s stance on the rectification of emotions towards one’s family and
relatives and to know a body of the objectives of emotions and their Quranic
regulations which were derived through examining the verses that speak about
the emotions that a person has towards his family and relatives. Thus, we will
clearly see the wisdom behind the Quran’s keenness on reforming human
emotions.
The treatise has finally concluded that the noble Quran rectifies
emotions in general and those shown to one’s family and relatives in particular.