In recent years, we have witnessed a growing interest in improving the reliability when
running parallel batch jobs on the High Performance Computing (HPC) environments.
However, existing distributed memory HPC systems do not provide proper quality of
service (QoS) controls and reliability features because of two limitations. First, standard
communication libraries such as Message Passing Interface (MPI) and Parallel Virtual
Machine (PVM) do not provide means for applications to specify service quality for
computation and communication. Secondly, modern high speed interconnects such as
Infiniband, Myrinet and Quadrics are optimized for performance rather than faulttolerance
and QoS control. On the other hand, Data Centric Publish Subscribe (DCPS)
model, which is the core of Data Distribution Service (DDS) systems, defines standards
that enable applications running on heterogeneous platforms to control various QoS
policies in a net centric system. Notably, a number of DDS standards are comparable to
those for High Performance Computing (HPC) systems. In this research, we present a
comprehensive survey of the studies exploring the reliability factors of distributed
computing in general and the Real Time Publish Subscribe (RTPS) models for HPC and
Grid computing in particular. We then investigate the QoS and reliability measures on the
different HPC layers, such as the high speed interconnects and the diskless HPC. Finally,
we present our model of incorporating DDS QoS and reliability controls into HPC. Our
results show that DDS integration into HPC adds considerable overheard in terms of
performance and network utilization when the application is mainly communicationbound,
while the performance is comparable to those MPI based applications when the
program is computation bound. In both cases, the solution is a viable option for those
applications in which QoS is considered a priority, or for those HPC batch jobs that
would run on commodity hardware, where the probability of failure is not negligible