Adaptive equalization made it possible for digital data transmission over radio
and telephone channels, as it mitigates the distortions caused by these channels.
Different algorithms have been used in adaptive equalization, e. g., the least mean
square (LMS) and the recursive least square (RLS) algorithms. Recently, particle
swarm optimization (PSO) technique was introduced and turned out to be very
effective in handling problems having non linear behaviour. Different versions of
the PSO algorithm were proposed, to name a few, the PSO using linearly time decreasing
inertia weight (PSO W) and the PSO using constant constriction factor
(PSO CCF). However, these algorithms still suffer the problem of stagnation and
can become less effective in a situation when the solution hits a local minimum.
We will address such issues here. In this thesis we have implemented a new algorithm for adaptive equalization, PSO using adaptive inertia weight (PSO AW).
A new algorithm, Hybrid Particle Swarm Optimization (HPSO), is also proposed
for adaptive equalization. In the end two new methodologies, named Local Search
(LS) and Train and Verify (T&V), are used to reduce the number of computations.
PSO AW uses adaptive inertia weights, instead of linearly decreasing inertia
weights, to improve the convergence rate and secure better steady state error
simultaneously. HPSO will incorporate three different techniques. These techniques
includes re randomization of particles to improve the search capacity of the
swarm, second one is to introduced more socialized behaviour among particles, so
that there is less chance of getting trap in to some local minimum values. And the
third one is adaptively inertia weight assignment to the particles. This hybrid algorithm
secured the minimum steady state error as compared to all previously used
PSO algorithms as well as the LMS algorithm in both non linear and linear channels.
In order to complete the process with minimum number of computations, our
proposed algorithm will be incorporated with two new techniques as well, LS and
T&V. While using these techniques, although there is slight effect on convergence
rate, but the reduction in number of PSO operations is remarkable. Significant
improvements in BER and convergence rate, obtained using these algorithms. Extensive
simulation results are conducted to confirm the consistency in performance
of these algorithms in different scenarios.
