This research is interested in shedding lights on the thought of Saadiah Ben
Yosef Al  Fayyumi who is one of the most prominent figures of Judaism in
the Middle Ages. It reviewed his life, era, compilations and his most
important contributions in linguistics, grammar, poetry and translation as
well as exegesis, theology and philosophy. He also had a very important
contribution in rituals especially prayer. The findings of the research can be
summarized in the following:
Saadiah Ben Yosef Al  Fayyumi is the son of Islamic Arabic civilization who
lived under its luminous umbrella and enjoyed its knowledge boom and then
finally reflected that in Judaism as a creed, thought and culture. He
developed Judaism on many levels: he deemed the one god far above
personification and anthropomorphism based on the concepts of Muslims in
this regard. He did not hesitate to frankly use Islamic Arabic vocabularies
such as: AL Rahman AL Raheem, Alhayulqayoom, Alwahid Alahad,
Yawmulforqan, Imam, Qibla, Yarka`, Yasjud…etc. he conveyed them along
with their context and indications and thus shedding sacredness upon the
Jewish text (which lost it in favor of Talmud) from the sacredness of the
Quranic text.
He moved from conveying Islamic words to conveying the concepts and
ideas so as to establish an "integrated Jewish paradigm" much needed and
lost along an extended history. In order to do that he first had to interpret
Torah to simplify it and remove any problem and he found a multitude of
Muslim scholars' exegeses and explanations. He  contrary to the
conventional method of Jewish exegetes  divided the topic he would explain and specified its pivots and sections and explained difficult and complicated
words. He, most importantly, resorts to the Islamic method of employing the
reason in understanding the purpose of divine revelation so as to remove
any possible contradiction. Thus Torah became a source of Jewish culture
not only their worship.
In this context  as clarified by the research  Fayyumi benefited from the
most prominent two doctrines in his age: the school of M`utazilites and the
one of Asha`rites. He used their terminology and tools to make a Jewish
paradigm so as to revive Judaism. He made text a priority but in the
meantime he highly respected reason to be an approach to understand the
text such as Asha`rites. This is normal for a rabbi like Fayyumi who lived for
a long time debating the Karaites who only acknowledged Torah and Book
of Joshua as the only sources of Jewish theology and legislation. The
method of Asha`rites was like a lever for him to prove that rational
interpretation (as seen in Talmud) can be useful in understanding Torah and
thus both are intertwined.
His benefit from the school of M`utazilites was also very big since he made
the best use of their prominent scholars to benefit Judaism as a religion and
as a history. The research spotted his statements that are similar to theirs in
terms of: the clearly decided verses and similar ones, names, attributes,
acts, award and punishment, divine mandate, divine justice, knowledge and
eternity of world …etc. his statements are similar to those of Wasil Ibn Atta,
Abilhudhail Al`allaf, Amr Ibn Bahr (Algahidh) and also later generations such
as Alqadi `Abdeljabbar.
The research concluded with an important finding we previously referred to
and again we emphasize it: Fayyumi benefited from Islam and Islamic
thought to create an integral Jewish paradigm classified in a way never known before even By Talmud which contains multitude of worships and
legislations. It, yet, lacks a theological integral philosophical frame about
Allah, universe, creation, resurrection and judgment which normally
characterize religions. Fayyumi for the first time made that and put nine
principles for Jewish creed (deity created world from nothing  belief in
oneness and justice of god  freedom of will reward and punishment eternity
of soul salvation of Israel eternity in hereafter  God's attributes are identical
to his Self and cannot be separated). He, thus, benefited from Islamic
paradigm in Quran and Sunnah. He affected and inspired those who came
after him such as Musa Ibn Maymoun who determined Jewish creeds in
thirteen known ones, most of which Fayyumi had defined before.
