The primary objective of this dissertation is the development of a modeling tool, using
the finite element method, for static and dynamic analysis of general refined laminated
shell structures undergoing finite rotations and large motion with strains assumed to
remain small.
A kinematic model based on the material representation is presented leading to a third
order shear deformation theory with large rotation capabilities and quadratic transverse
shear stress distribution across the thickness. A singularity free parametrization of the
rotation field is adopted with it the exponential mapping for configuration update. A
Total Lagrangian formulation is used with the second Piola Kirchhoff stresses, Green 
Lagrange strains and constitutive equations defined with respect to laminate general
curvilinear coordinates. The developed shell element is composed of an arbitrary number
of layers where the fiber directions are allowed to vary in any way from layer to layer.
The finite element discretization is carried out using a four node isoparametric laminated
shell element with seven degrees of freedom per node. The transverse shear locking
problem is avoided by applying the Assumed Natural Strain concept to the constant part
of the transverse shear strain. A consistent linearization of the weak form of equilibrium
equations (static case) or equations of motion (dynamic case) is undertaken to achieve a
quadratic rate of convergence.
The dynamic part consists of designing and implementing an energy momentum
conserving time stepping algorithm. This algorithm is based on a general methodology
for the design of exact energy momentum schemes, which was recently proposed in the
literature and applied successfully to nonlinear shells based on the first order shear
deformation theory. Here it is extended, for the first time, to the third order shear
deformation theory.
The developed finite rotation shell element is then implemented in two independent
computer programs, one for static and the other for dynamic analysis. Then it is tested on
some challenging linear and nonlinear problems, recently reported in the literature, and
the results show its excellent performance and robustness. A couple of examples show'
the discrepancy in prediction between third and first order shear deformation theories and
this raises the need for such refined theories.