In recent times, the search for new advanced materials has been the focus of numerous
research interests. In the field of analytical chemistry, great attention has been paid to
nano porous materials from different sources including calcium carbonate from waste
avian eggshells. Due to their intrinsic porous structures, researchers are now dedicating
much effort to the preparation and applications of calcium carbonate nanocrystals. In this
direction, a novel micro solid phase extraction method ( SPE) in combination with gas
chromatography flame ionization detector (GC FID) is described for the analysis of
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) in environmental matrix, with calcium
carbonate nanocrystals as sorbent material. Various factors that might affect extraction
recoveries were tested for seven PAHs. The developed method displayed high extraction
recoveries (85 110 ), high sample enrichment (388 1433), good repeatability ( RSD<
13) and involved the use of minimal solvents. This method compared favorably to
previously reported techniques. Analysis of sea water from Dammam Port revealed the
presence of the analytes at concentrations between 0.15 and 13.43 ng ml 1. A method for the determination of chlorinated hydrocarbons (CHCs) was developed. In
this study, functionalized polysulfone membrane has been utilized as a sorbent for the
extraction of CHCs in water samples. Two different functionalized polysulfones, (i)
phosphonic acid functionalized polysulfone (PPSU A) and (ii) phosphonic ester
functionalized polysulfone (PPSU E), both with cross linked and non cross linked subtypes,
were evaluated for the extraction of CHCs in water. A 10 ml of spiked water sample was extracted with 50 mg of the functionalized membrane. After extraction, the
membrane was desorbed by organic solvent and the extract was analyzed by gas
chromatography mass spectrometry. Eight CHCs, 3, 5 trichlorobenzene (1, 3, 5 TCB), 1,
2, 3 trichlorobenzene (1, 2, 3 TCB), 1, 1, 2, 3, 4, 4 hexachloro 1, 3 butadiene (HCBD), 1,
2, 4 trichloro 3 methylbenzene (TCMB), 1, 2, 3, 4 tetrachlorobenzene (1, 2, 3, 4 TeCB),
1, 2, 4, 5 tetrachlorobenzene (1, 2, 4, 5 TeCB), pentachlorobenzene (PeCB) and hexachlorobenzene (HCB) were used as model compounds. Experimental parameters
such as extraction time, desorption time, type of polymer membrane as well as the nature
of desorption solvent were optimized. Using optimum extraction conditions, calibration
curves were linear with correlation of determination between 0.9954 and 0.9999 over the
concentration range of 0.01 to 50  l 1. The method detection limits (at a signal to noise
ratio of 3) were in the range of 0.4 to 3.9 ng l 1. The proposed method was evaluated for
the determination of CHCs in drinking water samples.
